JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 1
CHASE: A Causal Hypergraph based Framework
for Root Cause Analysis in Multimodal
Microservice Systems
Ziming Zhao∗, Zhenwei Wang∗, Tiehua Zhang †, Member, IEEE, Zhishu Shen, Member, IEEE, Hai Dong, Senior
Member, IEEE, Zhen Lei, Xingjun Ma, Member, IEEE, Gaowei Xu, Member, IEEE, Zhijun Ding, Senior Member,
IEEE, Yun Yang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In recent years, the widespread adoption of dis-
tributed microservice architectures across the industry has
greatly increased the demand for improved system availability
and robustness. Enterprise-level microservice systems often in-
volve complex service invocation paths and system dependencies,
making it challenging to quickly identify anomalies during service
interactions, which inevitably hinders normal system operations
and maintenance. In this paper, we propose CHASE—a C ausal
Hypergraph grAph baSed framEwork—for root cause analysis in
microservice systems. CHASE is designed to handle multimodal
data sources, including traces, logs, and system monitoring
metrics. Specifically, CHASE begins by encoding each type of
input data—such as traces, logs, and metrics—into representative
embeddings. These embeddings are then integrated into a unified
multimodal invocation graph that captures the relationships
among services. Anomaly detection is subsequently applied to
each service instance node through attentive heterogeneous mes-
sage passing, leveraging contextual information from adjacent
metric and log nodes. Finally, CHASE constructs a causal hyper-
graph, where hyperedges represent inferred causal relationships
among anomalies, and utilizes this structure to accurately localize
root causes within the microservice system. We evaluate the
proposed framework on two public microservice datasets with
distinct attributes and compare with seven benchmark methods.
The results show that CHASE achieves the average performance
gain up to 36.2%(A@1) and 29.4%(Percentage@1), respectively
to its best counterpart.
Index Terms —Microservice systems, root cause localization,
multimodal data, graph neural network
†Corresponding author: Tiehua Zhang
*Ziming Zhao and Zhenwei Wang are equally contributed
Ziming Zhao is with the NEC Laboratories America, United States (e-mail:
zhziming1@gmail.com).
Zhenwei Wang is with the School of Computer Science, Univer-
sity of Nottingham Nningbo China, Ningbo, China (e-mail: zhen-
wei.wang@nottingham.edu.cn).
Tiehua Zhang and Zhijun Ding is with the School of Computer Sci-
ence and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China (e-mail: {tiehuaz,
dingzj}@tongji.edu.cn ).
Zhishu Shen and Zhen Lei is with the School of Computer Science and
Artificial Intelligence, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China (e-
mail: z shen@ieee.org, studentlz@whut.edu.cn).
Hai Dong is with the School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University,
Melbourne, Australia (e-mail: hai.dong@rmit.edu.au).
Xingjun Ma is with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China (e-mail: xingjunma@fudan.edu.cn).
Gaowei Xu is with the College of Electronic and Information Engineering
Tongji University, Shanghai, China (e-mail: xugaowei@tongji.edu.cn).
Yun Yang is with the School of Science, Computing and Engineering
Technologies, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia (e-
mail: yyang@swin.edu.au).
I. I NTRODUCTION
M
ICROSERVICE architecture has recently surged in
popularity due to its significant advantages such as
enhancing flexibility, scalability, and fault tolerance for con-
temporary industrial service-oriented systems [1]–[3]. This ar-
chitectural design involves a collection of small, independent,
and loosely coupled application instances, where each appli-
cation delivers a specific business function [4]. Specifically,
each microservice is independently developed, deployed, and
managed by a dedicated team, with communication facilitated
through APIs and protocols such as REST, HTTP, and mes-
saging systems.
However, fault localization and analysis in microservice
systems often pose significant challenges as microservices
are interconnected and each method or function call might
trigger multiple distributed service invocations, either syn-
chronously or asynchronously [5]–[7]. Operations engineers
are often overwhelmed by the need to manually collect data
from diverse sources during system failures. This process
involves managing intricately structured function call infor-
mation, semi-structured log text, and system performance
metrics, thereby complicating the identification and resolution
of issues. As the complexity of systems continues to grow,
there is an increasing emphasis on integrating Root Cause
Analysis (RCA) methods to timely uncover the underlying
reasons behind issues or failures [8]–[10].
Traditional RCA methods only offer suggestive clues, ne-
cessitating detailed manual analysis to determine the exact root
cause [11]. To date, numerous models have been proposed
for root cause analysis. One class of approaches explores
the feasibility of building causality graphs using merely trace
information, which consists of service invocation chains from
various service instances. Based on such intuition, causal
analysis algorithms such as PC [12] and GES [13] are
employed to infer the causal relationships between service
instances in the graph. Following that, a line of research [6],
[14]–[23] starts to integrate root cause analysis with machine
learning models and graph neural networks (GNNs), from
which the graph learning techniques are leveraged to model
the pairwise bivariate correlation of instances connected with
directed invocation edges. In these work, multimodal data of
service instances are used as supplementary features to enrich
arXiv:2406.19711v2  [cs.LG]  22 Apr 2025
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 2
Fig. 1. An exemplary service invocations in the microservice system with multimodal data, including trace, monitoring metrics and log data
features such as node embeddings and edge weights, while the
uncovering of bivariate correlation between pairs of instance
nodes are treated as the homogeneous graph learning task in
the trace typology, leading to the following challenges:
1) Joint processing of multimodal information and
invoke topology. Existing non-graph neural network
frameworks primarily extract causal relationships from
multimodal data to construct causal structure graphs but
fail to fully utilize call topology information. While
GNN frameworks adopt graph-based learning methods,
they fall short in simultaneously capturing multimodal
information, instance invoking topology, and causal
propagation.
2) Multivariate causal correlation capture among in-
stances. In microservice systems, each instance node
can influence multiple downstream calls, and causal
information may propagate across nodes several hops
away. Traditional graph neural networks primarily focus
on modeling pairwise local correlations along directed
edges, making it challenging to capture such complex
causal flows.
To tackle these issues, we propose a novel causal
hypergraph-based framework named CHASE, which is appli-
cable to inductively learn the root cause anomaly of microser-
vice systems with the presence of trace, log, and metric data
all together. Based on multimodal data, a heterogeneous invo-
cation graph is first constructed using trace topology, with ad-
ditional metric and log nodes connected to the source instance
nodes where the information is gathered. Representative node
embeddings are then generated using designated encoders for
each multimodal data type. The procedure for instance-level
anomaly detection is carried out using heterogeneous atten-
tive message passing. By doing so, CHASE can accurately
locate root cause instances with excellent performance by
learning from the constructed hypergraph, with hyperedges
representing causality propagation in the trace. We evaluate
CHASE on two datasets with different attributes—one with
static trace topology and one with dynamic trace topology. Our
experimental results show that CHASE significantly improves
fault localization accuracy compared to several state-of-the-art
methods.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) We introduce CHASE, an innovative graph learning
framework tailored to process multimodal data, includ-
ing logs, metrics, and traces, specifically for root cause
analysis. This framework integrates the encoding of
multimodal information with the development of an
invocation graph-based typology. We accomplish mul-
timodal feature fusion by solving the instance-level
anomaly detection with heterogeneous message passing.
Hereby, we attain the modeling of multimodal data and
information heterogeneity of microservice systems.
2) We achieve the root cause analysis task with hyper-
graph learning. CHASE captures the causality flow of
the anomalies in microservice systems by constructing
hypergraphs on the basis of typology, from which each
hyperedge represents causality propagation along the
invocation path. The multivariate causality corrleation
between a set of instances is modelled with hypergraph
convolution.
3) We conduct extensive experiments using two public
datasets from microservice systems and compare the
performance with a number of traditional and GNN-
based baselines, demonstrating that our proposal can
outperform comparative methods in the root cause anal-
ysis task. Apart from that, we release the source code 1
to advance the developement of this field.
1https://drive.google.com/file/d/11erha3k8FeA67z-
sfKGReqHz66PpO6o4/view?usp=sharing
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 3
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
introduces the related work including non-GNN based and
GNN-based root cause analysis. Section III explains the
overall framework of CHASE and the implementation details
including multimodal invocation graph construction, instance
level anomaly detection with heterogeneous message passing
and hypergraph causality learning for root cause analysis.
In Section IV, we evaluate the performance of CHASE and
extensively compare it with the state-of-the-art baselines on
two distinct datasets. Section V concludes the paper.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Non-GNN based Root Cause Analysis
The complexity of the microservice system has intensified
the need for effective root cause analysis techniques to diag-
nose and resolve issues. In recent years, a line of research
has focused on developing RCA methods for microservices
systems [24]. This section overviews some of the key research
studies in this area.
Existing work mainly uses three categories of data sources:
log-based [25], trace-based [1], and metric-based [26]. Log-
based RCA is a technique that analyzes service logs from
different instances in the microservice system to identify
potential root causes of issues, which naturally rely on the
accurate text parsing techniques in the log and are often
hard to work in real time. For instance, Zhang et al. [25]
propose a method for localizing operational faults that involve
two steps: it first preprocesses system logs to generate high-
quality features, and then uses machine learning model on
these features to identify the root cause of operational faults.
LogFlash [27] also integrates anomaly detection on logs as the
main part of root cause analysis based on the calculation of
deviation from normal log status. A common issue for log-
based RCA is that these works often require offline efforts
to extract key information in the log, and the performance of
the log-based RCA is also largely dependent on the overall
quality of the system logs. Trace-based research utilizes the
information through the complete tracing of the execution
paths and then identifies root causes that occur along the way.
TraceRCA [1] uses a tracing tool to collect trace data among
service invocations in the microservice system and employ the
decision tree to detect the root cause. However, using trace data
alone is insufficient as trace data only presents information at
service invocation level [10]. Apart from the abovementioned
two categories, the metirc-based RCA is now widely studied in
the research community. Most metric-based RCA research [14]
employs the monitoring data (e.g., CPU and memory usage,
network latency etc.) gathered from different service instances
to establish causal graphs and deduce the underlying root
causes, including MicroRCA [17] and CloudRanger [16],
while the former correlate application performance symptoms
with the root cause, the latter conducts second-order random
walk on impact graph to identify the problematic services.
However, the metric-based root cause analysis method does
not consider other types of information from microservice
systems. TrinityRCL harness telemetry data of application-
level, service-level, host-level, combined with metric-level to
construct the causal graph with heterogeneity [28].
B. GNN based Root Cause Analysis
Graph Neural Networks have demonstrated prowess in
capturing intricate relationships within graph-structured data,
i.e. data from non-Euclidean spaces. GNNs can be explained
as low-pass filters for graph Fourier transform from the
spectral perspective, and can also be regarded as a message
passing mechanism from neighbor nodes under the spatial
perspective. By leveraging popular GNN architectures such as
Graph Convolution Network (GCN) [29], GraphSAGE [30],
and Graph Attention Network (GAT) [31], tasks relating with
graph structural learning have been solved in fields of social
networks, biology, and recommendation systems, etc [32],
[33]. Due to the intrinsic nature of microservice systems where
individual services are pairwise correlated, it is intuitive to
model the dependencies between microservices with a graph
representation. Thus GNNs can be employed to learn the
patterns of microservice systems and facilitate root cause
analysis.
Recent advancement of GNNs has unleashed great potential
in analyzing the root cause problems, especially for cases
relying on graph structure data. Owing to the natural com-
patibility with generated causal graphs, researchers started
to leverage GNN to learn the failure propagation patterns
in the graph, thus giving a stronger generalization ability
compared with random walk based RCA frameworks on
causal graphs generated with Peter-Clark(PC) algoritm [19].
CausalRCA [18] designs a gradient-based causal structure
learning to capture linear and non-linear causal relations in
monitoring metrics and outputs a weighted causal directed
acyclic graph (DAG). Diagfusion [19] reports the state-of-the-
art RCA results using GNN. It combines deployment data
and traces to build a dependency graph and uses GNN to
generate the embeddings for each service instance, which are
then used to achieve two-fold failure diagnosis, i.e., root cause
fault localization and failure type determination. A hierarchical
causal network framework named REASON [34] is applied to
model the fault propagation of the microservice trace with
both within-network and across-network causal relationships
for root cause localization. Random walk on the learnt causal
network is further applied to locate a system fault. It is worth
noting that CausalRCA uses the encoder-decoder structure for
unsupervised learning to derive the weight of edges, which is
considered insufficient to represent the significance between
causes and effects in the causal graph. Diagfusion, on the other
hand, applies graph convolutional network for representation
learning on invocation graphs in an end-to-end fashion, re-
quiring a certain amount of labelled data. Moreover, Eadro
[35] employs GAT to learn representations of multimodal
information status. It integrates anomaly detection and root
cause localization into a unified end-to-end model, facilitating
knowledge sharing and joint training.
In all, non-GNN based frameworks focus more on min-
ing causal correlation from multimodal information, such as
metrics, so as to build up causal structure graphs repre-
senting causality flow, while GNN-based frameworks apply
graph learning methodologies and unravel the RCA task into
a trainable optimizing problem by minimizing the traning
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 4
Fig. 2. Overall framework of CHASE
loss. However, none of the aforementioned non-GNN based
frameworks or GNN-based frameworks can tackle RCA task
by capturing multimodal information, invocation typology as
well as causality propagation simultaneously in an end-to-end
trainable manner. Our proposed framework, CHASE, focuses
on exploiting logs and metrics to generate pertinent and
comprehensive embeddings, applies message passing in graph
to learn the non-Euclidean data of invocation traces, models
causality flow with hyperedges and presents an overall training
loss making RCA task soluble in an end-to-end way.
III. CHASE F RAMEWORK
In this section, we elaborate the CHASE framework with
three stages, including invocation graph generation, instance
anomaly detection with heterogeneous message passing, and
root cause analysis with hypergraph learning. Fig. 2 depicts the
overall architecture. Our proposed framework first constructs
a graph model by integrating multimodal data and topolog-
ical dependencies (Fig. 2(a)). Then, a heterogeneous graph
transformer (HGT) is employed to perform representation
learning for instance nodes and their associated data nodes
(Fig. 2(b)), aiming to incorporate the heterogeneity attributes
from multimodal data. Finally, hypergraph convolution is
utilized to conduct root cause localization for the instance
nodes (Fig. 2(c)). We list all necessary notations used in this
paper in Table I and provide a more detailed explanation of
the three submodules in the following subsections.
A. Multimodal Invocation Graph Construction
To begin with, we formally define the concept of an invoca-
tion graph within the context of microservice systems, which
is derived from a directed acyclic graph (DAG). A DAG is
a directed graph that contains no cycles, meaning there is no
path that starts at a given node and loops back to the same
node after traversing multiple edges. An invocation graph is a
special form of a DAG, where the edges represent the meta-
relationships between instances, logs, and metrics.
In a microservice system, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the
handling of a request is typically represented by a microservice
trace, which can be modeled as a directed acyclic graph
(DAG). In this representation, instances serve as nodes, and
each directed edge e(u,v ) signifies that instance v is invoked
by instance u. There are multiple types of service instances,
TABLE I
KEY NOTATIONS
Notation Description
∥ Concatenation
|·| Set size
σ(·) Activation function
G(I,M,L,E ) Invocation graph modelling a microservice trace
N (·) Neighbors of a node in G
I Set of instance nodes
M Set of metric nodes
L Set of log nodes
E Set of edges
E(·) Encoded node embedding
1I One hot embedding for instance category
H Number of attention heads
K(h)(·) Key embedding of attention head with index h
Q(h)(·) Query embedding of attention head with index h
V (h)(·) Anomaly information of attention head with index h
ASL−I (·) Anomaly score between a pair of instance and log
ASM−I (·) Anomaly score between a pair of instance and metric
˜A(I)(h) Nodewise normalized anomaly score of instance
H Hypergraph incidence matrix
Dv Diagonal matrix of node degree
De Diagonal matrix of hyperedge degree
D Detection head for root cause analysis
including application instances, message instances, gateway
instances, database instances. The instances and invocation
edges on a trace are extracted and assembled to obtain the
complete microservice invocation graph to represent business
processes. Generally, each instance continuously generates
logs during its runtime, while the DevOps platform concur-
rently records metrics related to the instance’s container and
physical server.
This aforementioned multimodal trace information is mod-
eled by the invocation graph denoted with G(I,M,L,E ),
whereI denotes the set of all instances in the trace,M denotes
the set of monitored metrics of all instances, andL denotes all
printed logs of the trace, including warnings and errors. We
then apply directed edges e(L,u )∈E and e(Mn,u )∈E to
represent the runtime records of metric and logs of instance
node u ∈ I. Notice that each instance is monitored with
multiple types of metrics so that there may exist multiple
metric-instance edges for a single instance, while we encode
all the log information into one node per instance to reduce
|L| for computational efficiency on the multimodal invocation
graph.
Note that the raw feature of log nodes are natural language
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 5
texts with semantic meaning, features of metric nodes are
composed of real valued time series data and the instance
nodes have categorical features. Consequently, an invoca-
tion graph that includes log, metric, and instance nodes can
be regarded as a graph containing multimodal information.
Hence, we apply respective encoders to encode the feature of
log, metric and instance nodes into embeddings denoted as
E(L), E(M), E(I), respectively:
E(L) = FastTextEncoder(L)
E(M) = TimeSeriesEncoder(MT )[:,−1]
E(I) = 1IΘe +P (k,d )
(1)
For log nodes, we follow the work from [19] which applies
FastText [36] in encoding the extracted log templates into
text embeddings. For metric nodes, we apply the trivial time
series transformer provided by Huggingface 2, and take the
output embedding from the last timestamp as the encoded
metric embedding. For instance nodes, the one-hot embedding
1I, representing the category of the specific instance node,
is projected with a learnable matrix Θe. And we combine
the information of the temporal invocation order of each
instance in the trace by applying positional encoding. We
denote positional encoding as P (k,i ) where i denotes the
index of a single feature in all feature dimensions d,k denotes
the temporal order in invocation and n is a hyperparameter set
to 20000 in defualt, as follows:
P (k,i ) =
(
sin k
ni/d, if i mod 2≡ 0
cos k
ni/d, if i mod 2≡ 1. (2)
B. Instance Level Anomaly Detection with Heterogeneous
Message Passing
After the whole encoding process where all the log node
embeddings, metric node embeddings and instance node em-
beddings are encoded into E(L), E(M), E(I), we construct
the multimodal invocation graph. The task of instance level
anomaly detection is a conventional procedure in root cause
analysis. In this section, we handle this task based on the
intrinsic heterogeneity of the invocation graph inspired by the
architecture design of heterogeneous graph transformer.
1) Attentive Anomaly Score: Starting with the subgraph
composed of a single instance node and its related log and
metric nodes, we model all the output logs with a single log
nodeL, while we model different types of monitored metrics
with several metric nodes n, denoted asMn. We first project
all the encoded embeddings into a specific vector space for
anomaly detection. For log and metric nodes, we perform the
following linear transformation.
K (h)(L) = E(L)W (h)
Log
K (h)(Mn) = E(Mn)W (h)
Metricn
Q(h)(I) = E(I)W (h)
Instance
(3)
2https://huggingface.co/blog/time-series-transformers
whereW (h)
Log,W (h)
Metricn,W (h)
Instance are learnable weight matrices
of dimension d× d/H, where d is the inital embedding
dimension from our multimodal encoders and H is the total
number of attention heads, h denotes the index of a specific
attention head.
For each instance node in the microservice system, multiple
types of runtime metrics and logs are continuously produced
and monitored by the DevOps platform. It is crucial to identify
which of these monitored records are most representative
of the detected instance-level anomaly. We achieve this by
quantifying the anomaly score, denoted as AS, with the
heterogeneous mutual attention weight between the instance
node and all its neighbors in the invocation graph.
AS (h)
L−I(I) =K (h)(L)AL−IQ(h)(I)T× ϕL√
d
AS (h)
Mn−I(I) =K (h)(Mn)AMn−IQ(h)(I)T× ϕMn√
d
(4)
BothAL−I,AMn−I are of dimension d/H×d/H, which
represents the projection matrix for calculating the atten-
tion weight between the instance node and its multimodal
neighbors. This matrix is designed to be shared among all
attention heads. The parameters ϕL and ϕMn represent the
prior significance assigned to different types of metrics and
logs. These parameters are learnable and can be initially set
to ones, reflecting our initial assumption that all types of logs
and metrics are equally important for identifying instance-level
anomalies.
The anomaly score is normalized for each instance node
with all its neighbors.
˜A(h)(I) = Softmax
∀L,Mn∈NI
{AS (h)
L−I(I)∥AS (h)
Mn−I(I)} (5)
The instance anomaly score for attention head h is of dimen-
sion 1×|NI|, where NI denotes the set of all neighbors of
nodeI and P ˜A(h)(I) = 1 in accordance with the normalized
attention weight.
2) Anomaly Information Passing: CHASE further on ex-
tracts the anomaly information from the metric nodes and log
nodes by performing another linear transformation with their
encoded embeddings.
V (h)(L) = E(L)W′(h)
Log
V (h)(Mn) = E(Mn)W′(h)
Metricn
(6)
In order to extract the anomaly detection information from all
the attention heads, we concat all the embeddings together and
form:
V (h)(I) =V (h)(L) ∥
∀Mn∈NI
V (h)(Mn) (7)
whereV (h)(I) represents the anomaly information of instance
nodeI from all its neighbors NI and with the dimension of
|NI|×d/H. Since each attention head will extract the anomaly
detection information from a separate projection field,V (h)(I)
will be stacked up to the size ofH×|NI|×d/H, which will be
weighted summed by ˜A(h)(I) so as to gather all the anomaly
information from the neighbors of instance node I based on
the significance of the attentively learnt anomaly score.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 6
3) Instance Level Anomaly Embedding Update: We aggre-
gate all the anomaly information based on its attention weight
calculated from Equation 5 by:
ˆX(I) = ∥
h∈[1,H]
{ ˜A(h)(I)V (h)(I)} (8)
ˆX(I) denotes the instance level anomaly embedding learnt
from the heterogeneous invocation graph. Each instance node
will gather anomaly information from its monitored log and
metric neighbor nodes, and the instance node embedding is
updated with this learnt anomaly embedding, which reflects
the procedure of anomaly detection.
˜X = (1−γ) ˆWIσ( ˆX(I)) +γE(I) (9)
ˆWI is applied to project the anomaly information embed-
ding back to the same vector space with the instance node
features E(I) after being activated. γ is the hyperparameter
representing our prior knowledge on how significantly an
instance-level anomaly will result in the root cause of a trace-
level anomaly. The whole framework of instance level anomaly
detection is delineated in Fig. 2(b).
C. Hypergraph Causality Learning for RCA
Lastly, CHASE perform root cause analysis with con-
structed hyperedges representing causality flow on the invo-
cation graph, where heterogeneous anomaly information is
propagated to each instance node. Let G = ( V,E ) be a
hypergraph with incidence matrixH.V denotes the vertices of
the hypergraph, E denotes the edges of it and H∈ R|V|×|E|.
Considering vertex i, if i can be reached from edge ϵ, it then
can be denoted as Hiϵ = 1. Otherwise,Hiϵ = 0.
In a hypergraph, each hyperedge can encompasses more
than two vertices, meaning:
X
n∈V
Hnϵ∈ N+ (10)
We useWH to denote a diagonal matrix, the element of which
represents the weight of each hyperedge. Dv is the diagonal
matrix which denotes the degree of each vertex and De is the
diagonal matrix which denotes the degree of each hyperedge
as follows:
Dv,ii =
|E|X
ϵ=1
WH,ϵϵHiϵ (11)
De,ϵϵ =
|V|X
n=1
Hnϵ (12)
Next, we introduce the algorithm to generate hyperedges for
the constructed invocation graph, so as to learn the multivariate
causality information for root cause analysis with hypergraph
convolution. The trace typology graph illustrated in Fig. 2(c) is
generated by removing all the log nodes and metric nodes from
the multimodal invocation graph as the anomaly embedding
are learnt at this stage from Equation 9. Suppose an extra
interventionT , for instance, a 5-second network package loss
of the server, is applied to a random instance j. Taking the
output of instance j as a random variable Yj, then
P (Yj) = ∀
i∈Descendant(j)
P (Yj|do(Ti))
P (Yj)̸= ∀
i∈Ascendant(j)
P (Yj|do(Ti)) (13)
Here we take instance node with index 6 as an example
to consider the effect (centered with red circle in Fig 2(c)).
Denoting the output of instance 6 with random variable Y6.
Since the instances with index larger than 6, which are
descendant nodes i ∈ [7, 11], are called by instance 6 and
their states are considered to be resulted from Y6, intervention
on these instances will not change the cause instance output
Y6. However, Y6 is not independent with the intervention on
its ascendant nodes including intervention directly imposed
on itself, namely i ∈ [1, 6]. This leads to the hyperedge
construction process (See Algorithm 1).
Algorithm 1 Trace Level Causality Hyperedge Construction
INPUT: The invocation graphG(I,E )
OUTPUT: Incidence matrixH
1:H← 0 ▷ Incidence matrix initialized to zero matrix
2: forv∈I do
3: forvp∈ Parent(v) do ▷ For each invocation
trace that reaches the specific instance, create a hyperedge
connecting all upstream instances on the invocation path
4: h← 01×|I|
5: h[v]← 1,h [vp]← 1
6: forva∈ Ascendant(vp) do
7: h[va]← 1
8: end for
9: end for
10: H←H∥ h
11: end for
12: h← 01×|I|
13: h[v]← 1
14: forvd∈ Descendant(v) do ▷ Create the hyperedge
connecting all downstream instances
15: h[vd]← 1
16: end for
17:H←H∥ h
18: returnH ▷ The incidence matrix of the constructed
hypergraph isH
To be more specific, Algorithm 1 initializes the incidence
matrix to an empty zero matrix with line 1. Line 2 loops
through all the vertices of the trace invocation graph G,
picking a single vertex each time and constructing multiple
hyperedges representing both causality and results. Lines 3-
10 loop through each parent node of the target instance node,
and construct a hyperedge that connects all ascendants of the
parent node. Lines 12-17 construct the hyperedge that connects
all the descendant nodes. Fig. 2(c) gives an illustration of the
hyperedge construction for instance with index 6, which is
marked in red. As instance 6 has two parent nodes, namely
instances 2 and 5, a total number of three hyperedges will be
generated for instance 6.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 7
With the hypergraph that represents the invocation causality
being constructed, we initialize the node embeddings with ˜X
learnt from Equation 9. In order to localize the trace level
root cause instance, a convolution operation is performed on
the hypergraph so that the causality information can propagate
to each instance node from the constructed hyperedges. We
consider each hyperedge as of the same significance, hence
WH = I. And the hypergraph convolution can be defined as
follows:
˜X (l) =σ(D
− 1
2
v HD−1
e HTD
− 1
2
v ˜X (l−1)Θl) (14)
We set ˜X (0) = ˜X from Equation 9, and Θ∈ Rd×d′
is the
learnable projection that captures the causality of the trace
level anomaly. In all, the root cause can be localized with
a detection head matrix D∈ Rd′×1 being applied to every
instance node of the trace, and an end-to-end training schema
can be accomplished by minimizing the overall loss:
L =− 1
N
NX
i=1
(
|I|X
n=1
y(i)
n log(Softmax( ˜X (i,l)D)n)) (15)
IV. E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate the performance of CHASE framework in this
section. Specifically, we compare the proposed framework
with several baseline frameworks for RCA, including non-
GNN based ones and GNN-based ones. To provide a com-
prehensive evaluation, we conduct experiments on two open-
source datasets.
A. Experimental Setting
1) DataSets: The first dataset is a public dataset named
Generic AIOps Atlas, provided by Cloudwise 3; the second
dataset is a real-world dataset collected from the AIOps 2020
competition4. We give the details of the datasets here.
a) GAIA - The Generic AIOps Atlas dataset contains multi-
modal information from the business simulation system Mi-
croSS, including metrics, logs and traces. This dataset contains
mobile service, log service, web service, database service and
Redis service. It contains 10 service instances in total. The
anomalies are injected into the log to simulate the malfunction
of service invocation. The dataset contains four types of
anomalies, including login failure, memory anomalies, access
denied exceptions and missing files. This dataset includes 1099
static traces, which means the number of instance involved in
each trace, the invocation order and trace typology all remain
the same. Following the training and testing set split setting
from DiagFusion [19], we assign 160 traces for training, and
the remaining for validation and testing.
b) AIOps 2020 - This dataset is collected for the AIOps
2020 challenge hosted by Tsinghua Netman Lab. The chal-
lenge aims at testing the availability of all microservices before
releasing them into the production environment. This environ-
ment encompasses hundreds of microservice instances, includ-
ing network instances, kernel instances, docker instances, etc.
3https://github.com/CloudWise-OpenSource/GAIA-DataSet
4https://github.com/NetManAIOps/AIOps-Challenge-2020-Data
Each microservice instance is deployed on multiple physical
machines, resulting in a highly complex system environment.
Moreover, since each request can be handled by a subset
of components of the overall system without involving all
instances, invocation traces are considered dynamic. In other
words, the trace typology in the dataset differ from one
another. Fig. 1 is a service invocation sample from the dataset,
with both log and metric data (CPU and memory usage, etc.)
recorded for each service instance. Message instances trigger
asynchronous invocations, represented with red arrows in the
graph, while network gateway instances, service instances
and database instances trigger synchronous invocations, rep-
resented with black arrows. For data collection, the whole
system had been running for 3 months, in which 68 manually
injected failures occurred, and each of them lasted for 5
minutes approximately. During each failure, there are hundreds
of traces continuously being deployed in the system, among
which may or may not be erroneous since a single failure
would not result in the collapse of the whole microservice
system. In order to evidently illustrate the performance of
both baseline models and the proposed CHASE, we split each
anomaly duration into a five-minute span, a three-minute span
and a one-minute span based on the true label which records
the starting timestamp of each failure, and we infer that a
better approach can detect a higher percentage of anomaly
traces within these time spans. As each failure is gradually
recovered after its injection, the five-minute span potentially
contains a lower percentage of anomaly traces compared with
the one-minute span since the failure has a higher probability
of being recovered and resulting in more non-anomaly traces.
2) Baseline Methods: We compare our proposed frame-
work with seven baseline methods described as follows. The
compared baselines can be divided into three categories:
causality-based RCA approaches (i.e., PC and GES), cor-
relation learning based approaches (i.e., CloudRanger and
MicroRCA), and GNN based approaches (i.e., CausalRCA,
TrinityRCL and Diagfusion).
• PC [12] is widely used for causal relationship inference
and proven effective in identifying the root causes of
system failures, process deviations, sensor failures, and
insurance claims. It has been adopted in root cause
analysis across various domains, such as system failure
diagnosis, semiconductor manufacturing, wind turbines,
and insurance.
• GES [13] stands for Greedy Equivalence Search algo-
rithm, which is mainly applied for casual relationship
inference. Different from PC which relies on test of in-
dependence, GES applies optimal structure identification
with greedy search to generate the causal graph.
• CloudRanger is a root cause identification tool first
introduced in [16]. It collects and analyzes system logs,
metrics, and other data sources to build a machine learn-
ing model for root cause prediction.
• MicroRCA [17] is an automated, fine-grained root cause
localization framework to analyze monitoring data and
localizes faulty services in the microservice architecture.
It designs a gradient-based causal structure learning to
capture linear and non-linear causal relations in monitor-
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 8
TABLE II
OVERALL PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
Dataset GAIA AIOps 2020
Evaluation Metric A@1 A@3 Avg@5 Percentage@5 Percentage@3 Percentage@1
Causality-based PC 0.2960 0.6368 0.5953 - - -
GSE 0.3003 0.5399 0.5154 0.11 0.08 0.14
Correlation-based
CloudRanger 0.3290 0.4771 0.4883 - - -
MicroRCA 0.3421 0.5528 0.5712 0.08 0.13 0.17
TrinityRCL 0.4503 0.8244 0.7651 0.12 0.14 0.15
GNN-based
CausalRCA 0.3652 0.4973 0.5966 - - -
DiagFusion 0.4121 0.8157 0.7484 0.12 0.14 0.14
Proposed Method 0.6135 0.8823 0.8276 0.15 0.16 0.22
− indicates baseline frameworks being inapplicable to certain dataset due to dynamic trace typology.
ing metrics.
• TrinityRCL [28] localizes the root causes of anomalies
at multiple levels of granularity by harnessing all types
of telemetry data to construct a causal graph representing
the intricate, dynamic, and nondeterministic relationships
among the various entities related to the anomalies.
• CausalRCA [18] uses causal inference to automatically
identify the root cause of performance issues in microser-
vices. Specifically, it constructs a directed acyclic graph
(DAG) that represents the causal relationships between
services and their performance metrics, from which the
root cause can be identified by inferring the causal
relationships with the trained graph neural network.
• Diagfusion [19] is a robust failure diagnosis method that
leverages multimodal data. It combines deployment data
and traces to build a dependency graph, applies GNN to
generate learnt representation for each service instance
and achieve two-fold failure diagnosis, i.e., root cause
instance localization and failure type determination.
Note that we apply the same hyperparameters of all the
baseline RCA frameworks according to the best performance
reported in their papers and source code. Both datasets are
split into training/validation/testing sets, avoiding the possible
overfitting issue. For baseline methods that require a PageRank
to infer the root cause instance, we employ the damping
factor as 0.85, maximum iteration as 100 and maximum error
tolerance as 0.01. For CHASE, we apply 3 attention layers for
heterogeneous message passing, each layer with 8 attention
heads. We set LeakyReLU as the activation function with a
negative slope coefficient being 0.3. We apply a single hyper-
graph convolution layer for causality learning, with embedding
dimensionality equal to 128. The weight hyperparameter γ in
Equation. 9 is set to 0.5 by default.
3) Evaluation Metrics: Our framework aims to infer the
root cause instance of each anomaly case accurately. We adopt
the widely used evaluation metrics in the root cause inference
task [19] while slightly modifying these metrics to suit real-
world scenarios. We choose Top-1 accuracy ( A@1), Top-3
accuracy (A@3) and Top-5 average accuracy (Avg@5) as three
different evaluation metrics. Since often only the top three
predicted results would be manually examined in real-world
cases, we thus include A@1,A@3 andAvg@5 to evaluate the
robustness of the root cause analysis methods.
Top-k accuracy (A@k) is calculated in the following way,
with RCa as the ground truth root cause instance of anomaly
tracea,RCˆa[k] as the Top-k root cause instances set generated
by the root cause inference system based on the information
of anomaly trace a,|D| as the size of the dataset:
A@k = 1
|D|
X
a∈D
(
1, if RCa∈RCˆa[k]
0, otherwise (16)
Avg@5 is calculated based on the Top-k accuracy with k
ranging from 1 to 5:
Avg@5 = 1
5
X
1≤k≤5
A@k (17)
Percentage of erroneous traces occurred in n-minute span
(Percentage@n) is calculated with the number of traces with
being detected as anomalous divided by the total number of
traces occurred within n minutes after the labelled timestamp
T , where f(·) denotes the binary prediction result:
Percentage@n =
P
xt,t∈[T,T +n]
1{f(xt) = 1}
|{xt,t∈ [T,T +n]}| (18)
B. Evaluation Results
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method,
we compare CHASE with the baseline frameworks from dif-
ferent categories. The evaluation results are shown in Table II.
The causality-based methods extract the causal graph from
history traces, and both PC and GES apply PageRank on the
causal graph with all edge weights equal to the out-degree
of nodes. It can be observed clearly that the performance of
PC and GES is worse than correlations-based methods, which
generate the edge weights in the causal graph by calculat-
ing the correlations through monitored metrics. Specifically,
MicroRCA integrates service invocation graphs with causal
graphs and applies customized random walks, which outper-
forms CloudRanger that only considers the attributed graph
with anomalous propagation edges, indicating the necessity
of leveraging the causal relationships. Regarding GNN-based
methods, CausalRCA calculates edge weights through DAG-
GNN with variational inference, requiring no training data
labels. Due to the limitations of unsupervised learning, it
reports worse performance to DiagFusion across all evaluation
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 9
Fig. 3. Sensitivity analysis: (a) number of attention layers; (b) different positional encoding; (c) hidden dimension; (d) number of causality layers
metrics as DiagFusion takes advantage of multi-modal data to
generate the node features in the graph and trains end-to-end
supervised RCA tasks. In general, our proposed method, which
integrates microservice invocation graphs, anomaly heteroge-
neous graph and adaptively learnt causality with hypergraph,
can obtain better performance compared with all baselines. On
GAIA dataset, our proposed method can achieve 36.2%, 7.2%,
8.1% higher than the best baseline on A@1, A@3, Avg@5,
respectively.
When it comes to the more complex AIOps 2020 dataset,
the invocation typology of traces in training and testing set
varies. As a result, the PC, CouldRanger and CausalRCA,
which require static trace typology and are not inductive on
traces with unseen typology from the training set, are not
applicable to perform root cause analysis under such condition.
Therefore, evaluation results of the aforementioned methods
on AIOps 2020 dataset are left blank in Table II. Our proposed
method can still retain a significant performance gain of
25.0%, 14.3%, 29.4% compared with the best baseline on the
percentage of erroneous traces detected in 5-min span, 3-min
span and 1-min span.
C. Sensitivity Analysis
We conduct the sensitivity analysis in this part on both
datasets. Specifically, Fig. 3 (a1) and (a2) shows how the
number of attention layers affects the performance on GAIA
and AIOps 2020 dataset, respectively. When the number of
attention layers increases up to 3, there is typically an improve-
ment in the performance of our model. The performance starts
to drop afterwards, indicating the potential overfitting problem.
Regarding different types of positional encoding, depicted
in Fig. 3 (b1) and (b2), traditional embedding and learn-
able embedding demonstrate superior performances. We apply
tradition embedding as it is simply composed of constants
calculated from Equation.2, which reduce the total amount of
learnable parameters and result in lower computational cost.
The effect of hidden state dimension for heterogeneous mes-
sage passing and hypergraph convolution is depicted in Fig. 3
(c1) and (c2), the performance of the model evidently surges
until the dimension reaches 128, then the performance is only
slightly improved when hidden state dimension is doubled to
256. Thus, considering the trade-off between computational
efficiency and performance, we apply a hidden state dimension
of 128. For the number of hypergraph convolution layers
demonstrated in Fig. 3 (d1) and (d2), the performance of the
model continues to drop as the number of layer increases.
Hence, we apply a single hypergraph convolution layer. In-
tuitively, as a single hypergraph layer is already capable
of capturing high-order multivariate correlation, stacking up
hypergraph layers brings in extra redundancies in the training
process, thus causing undesirable performance drops.
D. Ablation Study
To evaluate the effectiveness of the main components of
CHASE, we conducted an ablation study on the GAIA dataset
using the following three variations: V1: remove the instance
embedding layer while keeping the non-learnable positional
embedding layer. V2: remove the heterogeneous message
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 10
TABLE III
ABLATION STUDY RESULTS
Ablation Strategy A@1 A@3 Avg@5
Default Method 0.6135 0.8823 0.8276
V1: w/o instance embedding 0.5927 0.8554 0.7852
V2: w/o heterogeneous message passing 0.3845 0.5403 0.6581
V3: w/o causal hyperedge 0.4679 0.8106 0.7598
passing from the graph convolution layer. V3: remove the final
hypergraph layer which learns the propagation of causality.
Table III lists the change of performance of each variant.
Since the instance embedding layer captures the difference
between instances, reducing these features in V1 will result
in missing information of the whole trace typology and invo-
cation structure, leading to a subtle drop of performance of
3.3% in A @1, clearly shown in Table III.
Considering the V2 variant of CHASE, we replace the
heterogeneous message passing layer with a homogeneous
graph attention layer, which results in a 37% performance
drop in A @1. This emphasizes the significance to model the
heterogeneous correlation of the invocation graph. To provide
a clearer illustration of the impact of learning the heterogeneity
attributes among metrics, logs, and instances through message
passing in CHASE, Fig. 4 plots a comparison between the
homogeneous edge weight and the heterogeneous edge weight
on the 160th trace in GAIA dataset (webservice2 as the root
cause instance). As the edges related to webservice2 (last
columns in both figures) are granted with higher weights, it
indicates that the heterogeneous message passing layer is able
to enhance the root cause inference’s performance, which is
achieved by directing more attention towards the edges related
to the instance of the root cause.
In the context of causality inference, it has been observed
that directly integrating the detection head into the output of
the heterogeneous message passing layer in the V3 variant
leads to the causal hypergraph degrading into a heterogeneous
graph neural network. In this scenario, information propagates
only through K hops (where K represents the number of
layers), which contradicts the nature of anomaly causality that
may propagate across an arbitrary number of hops depending
on the invocation. This leads to a performance drop of 23.7%
in A@1.
In comparison to the performance of V2, V3 which retains
the heterogeneity is considerably more critical. As a result,
V3 exhibits higher accuracy of 21.6% in A @1 than V2, since
causal edges provide less topological information than actual
invocation edges. Nevertheless, V3 demonstrates superior ro-
bustness (33.3% higher in A @3 and 13.3% higher in Avg @5)
than V2, as causal edges denote stronger causality than actual
invocation edges.
V. C ONCLUSION
For complex microservice systems, conducting a root cause
analysis is essential in identifying and addressing the underly-
ing issues that hinder the optimal performance of the system.
To tackle this challenge, we propose a causal hypergraph based
framework named CHASE to accurately locate the root cause
Fig. 4. Causal weights visualization
instances of failures, facilitating effective troubleshooting and
system maintenance. Starting with modeling microservice sys-
tems with graph representations, we apply encoders and em-
bedding layers combined with positional encoding to encode
the multimodal data of trace, log and metrics into an invocation
graph. CHASE employs heterogeneous message passing on
invocation graphs to tackle instance-level anomaly detection.
Next, it constructs a hypergraph with each hyperedge capturing
the causality flow for each instance. Finally, the designated
hypergraph module locates the root cause anomaly with a
detection head applied to each updated node embedding after
hypergraph convolution. We evaluate CHASE using two real-
world datasets with seven baseline methods, and the evaluation
results confirm the superiority of our proposed framework. For
the future work, hypergraph learning techniques on modelling
spatiotemporal graphs can be applied to capture the causality
structure of the trace, which is dynamically evolving since the
whole trace typology is gradually formed by sequential invo-
cations ranging in a certain time interval. Additionally, a single
powerful autoregressive encoder that is intrinsically trained
on multimodal data, such as the large language model, can
substitute the dedicated log and metric encoders of CHASE,
in order to enhance the quality of embeddings, as well as
robustly unify the information of metrics and log.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Li, J. Chen, R. Jiao, N. Zhao, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Y . Wu, L. Jiang,
L. Yan, Z. Wang, Z. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Nie, K. Sui, and D. Pei,
“Practical root cause localization for microservice systems via trace
analysis,” in International Symposium on Quality of Service . IEEE,
2021, pp. 1–10.
[2] M. Baboi, A. Iftene, and D. G ˆıfu, “Dynamic microservices to create
scalable and fault tolerance architecture,” Procedia Computer Science ,
vol. 159, pp. 1035–1044, 2019.
[3] V . Ramu, “Performance impact of microservices architecture,” The
Review of Contemporary Scientific and Academic Studies , vol. 3, 2023.
[4] T. Zhang, Z. Shen, J. Jin, A. Tagami, X. Zheng, and Y . Yang, “ESDA:
an energy-saving data analytics fog service platform,” in International
Conference on Service-Oriented Computing . Springer, 2019, pp. 171–
185.
[5] X. Peng, “Large-scale trace analysis for microservice anomaly detection
and root cause localization,” in Proceedings of the Federated Africa and
Middle East Conference on Software Engineering , 2022, pp. 93–94.
[6] D. Liu, C. He, X. Peng, F. Lin, C. Zhang, S. Gong, Z. Li, J. Ou,
and Z. Wu, “Microhecl: High-efficient root cause localization in large-
scale microservice systems,” in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International
Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice
(ICSE-SEIP). IEEE, 2021, pp. 338–347.
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, APRIL 2024 11
[7] P. Chen, Y . Qi, P. Zheng, and D. Hou, “Causeinfer: Automatic and
distributed performance diagnosis with hierarchical causality graph in
large distributed systems,” in IEEE INFOCOM 2014-IEEE Conference
on Computer Communications . IEEE, 2014, pp. 1887–1895.
[8] A. Ikram, S. Chakraborty, S. Mitra, S. Saini, S. Bagchi, and M. Ko-
caoglu, “Root cause analysis of failures in microservices through causal
discovery,”Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35,
pp. 31 158–31 170, 2022.
[9] ´A. Brand ´on, M. Sol ´e, A. Hu ´elamo, D. Solans, M. S. P ´erez, and
V . Munt´es-Mulero, “Graph-based root cause analysis for service-oriented
and microservice architectures,” Journal of Systems and Software , vol.
159, p. 110432, 2020.
[10] M. Kim, R. Sumbaly, and S. Shah, “Root cause detection in a service-
oriented architecture,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Re-
view, vol. 41, pp. 93–104, 2013.
[11] J. Soldani and A. Brogi, “Anomaly detection and failure root cause
analysis in (micro) service-based cloud applications: A survey,” ACM
Computing Surveys, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1–39, 2022.
[12] M. Sol ´e, V . Munt´es-Mulero, A. I. Rana, and G. Estrada, “Survey on
models and techniques for root-cause analysis,”arXiv:1701.08546, 2017.
[13] D. M. Chickering, “Optimal structure identification with greedy search,”
Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 3, pp. 507–554, 2002.
[14] J. Lin, P. Chen, and Z. Zheng, “Microscope: Pinpoint performance issues
with causal graphs in micro-service environments,” in International
Conference on Service-Oriented Computing . Springer, 2018, pp. 3–
20.
[15] B. Sharma, P. Jayachandran, A. Verma, and C. R. Das, “CloudPD:
Problem determination and diagnosis in shared dynamic clouds,” in
International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks. IEEE,
2013, pp. 1–12.
[16] P. Wang, J. Xu, M. Ma, W. Lin, D. Pan, Y . Wang, and P. Chen,
“CloudRanger: Root cause identification for cloud native systems,” in
International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing. IEEE,
2018, pp. 492–502.
[17] L. Wu, J. Tordsson, E. Elmroth, and O. Kao, “MicroRCA: Root
cause localization of performance issues in microservices,” in Network
Operations and Management Symposium . IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–9.
[18] R. Xin, P. Chen, and Z. Zhao, “CausalRCA: Causal inference based pre-
cise fine-grained root cause localization for microservice applications,”
Journal of Systems and Software , vol. 203, 2023.
[19] S. Zhang, P. Jin, Z. Lin, Y . Sun, B. Zhang, S. Xia, Z. Li, Z. Zhong,
M. Ma, W. Jin, D. Zhang, Z. Zhu, and D. Pei, “Robust failure diagnosis
of microservice system through multimodal data,” arXiv:2302.10512,
2023.
[20] G. Rong, H. Wang, S. Gu, Y . Xu, J. Sun, D. Shao, and H. Zhang,
“Locating anomaly clues for atypical anomalous services: An industrial
exploration,” IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
pp. 2746–2761, 2023.
[21] G. P. Bhandari and R. Gupta, “Fault analysis of service-oriented systems:
A systematic literature review,” IET Software, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 446–
460, 2018.
[22] C. Zhang, Z. Dong, X. Peng, B. Zhang, and M. Chen, “Trace-based
multi-dimensional root cause localization of performance issues in mi-
croservice systems,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM 46th International
Conference on Software Engineering , 2024, pp. 1–12.
[23] G. Yu, P. Chen, H. Chen, Z. Guan, Z. Huang, L. Jing, T. Weng,
X. Sun, and X. Li, “Microrank: End-to-end latency issue localization
with extended spectrum analysis in microservice environments,” in
Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 , 2021, pp. 3087–3098.
[24] A. Gholami and A. K. Srivastava, “Comparative analysis of ML tech-
niques for data-driven anomaly detection, classification and localization
in distribution system,” in North American Power Symposium . IEEE,
2021, pp. 1–6.
[25] Y . Zhang, Z. Guan, H. Qian, L. Xu, H. Liu, Q. Wen, L. Sun, J. Jiang,
L. Fan, and M. Ke, “CloudRCA: a root cause analysis framework for
cloud computing platforms,” in Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, 2021, pp. 4373–
4382.
[26] M. Ma, W. Lin, D. Pan, and P. Wang, “Self-adaptive root cause
diagnosis for large-scale microservice architecture,” IEEE Transactions
on Services Computing , vol. 15, pp. 1399–1410, 2020.
[27] T. Jia, Y . Wu, C. Hou, and Y . Li, “LogFlash: Real-time streaming
anomaly detection and diagnosis from system logs for large-scale
software systems,” in International Symposium on Software Reliability
Engineering. IEEE, 2021, pp. 80–90.
[28] S. Gu, G. Rong, T. Ren, H. Zhang, H. Shen, Y . Yu, X. Li, J. Ouyang,
and C. Chen, “TrinityRCL: Multi-granular and code-level root cause
localization using multiple types of telemetry data in microservice
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , vol. 49, no. 5,
pp. 3071–3088, 2023.
[29] T. N. Kipf and M. Welling, “Semi-supervised classification with graph
convolutional networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.02907 , 2016.
[30] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation
learning on large graphs,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[31] P. Velickovic, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and
Y . Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” Statistics, vol. 1050, no. 20,
pp. 10–48 550, 2017.
[32] T. Zhang, Y . Liu, Z. Shen, R. Xu, X. Chen, X. Huang, and X. Zheng,
“An adaptive federated relevance framework for spatial temporal graph
learning,” IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 5, pp. 2227–
2240, 2024.
[33] Y . Liu, Z. Zhao, T. Zhang, K. Wang, X. Chen, X. Huang, J. Yin, and
Z. Shen, “Exploiting spatial-temporal data for sleep stage classification
via hypergraph learning,” in IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing . IEEE, 2024, pp. 5430–5434.
[34] D. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Ni, L. Tong, Z. Wang, Y . Fu, and H. Chen,
“Hierarchical graph neural networks for causal discovery and root cause
localization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.01987 , 2023.
[35] C. Lee, T. Yang, Z. Chen, Y . Su, and M. R. Lyu, “Eadro: An end-
to-end troubleshooting framework for microservices on multi-source
data,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International Conference on Software
Engineering (ICSE). IEEE, 2023, pp. 1750–1762.
[36] A. Joulin, E. Grave, P. Bojanowski, and T. Mikolov, “Bag of tricks for
efficient text classification,” arXiv:1607.01759, 2016.