arXiv:2509.15635v1  [cs.AI]  19 Sep 2025
MicroRCA-Agent: Microservice Root Cause Analysis Method Based on Large Language
Model Agents
Pan Tang1, Shixiang Tang1, Huanqi Pu1, Zhiqing Miao2, Zhixing Wang3
1School of Communication and Information Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
2School of Communication and Electronic Engineering, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
ptang@shu.edu.cn,tangsx624@163.com,1287056469@qq.com,52275904009@stu.ecnu.edu.cn,wangwangzx@bit.edu.cn
Abstract
This paper presents MicroRCA-Agent, an innovative solu-
tion for microservice root cause analysis based on large
language model agents, which constructs an intelligent
fault root cause localization system with multimodal data
fusion1. The technical innovations are embodied in three
key aspects: First, we combine the pre-trained Drain log
parsing algorithm with multi-level data filtering mech-
anism to efficiently compress massive logs into high-
quality fault features. Second, we employ a dual anomaly
detection approach that integrates Isolation Forest un-
supervised learning algorithms with status code valida-
tion to achieve comprehensive trace anomaly identifica-
tion. Third, we design a statistical symmetry ratio fil-
tering mechanism coupled with a two-stage LLM anal-
ysis strategy to enable full-stack phenomenon summa-
rization across node-service-pod hierarchies. The mul-
timodal root cause analysis module leverages carefully
designed cross-modal prompts to deeply integrate mul-
timodal anomaly information, fully exploiting the cross-
modal understanding and logical reasoning capabilities
of large language models to generate structured analy-
sis results encompassing fault components, root cause
descriptions, and reasoning trace. Comprehensive abla-
tion studies validate the complementary value of each
modal data and the effectiveness of the system architec-
ture. The proposed solution demonstrates superior perfor-
mance in complex microservice fault scenarios, achieving
a final score of 50.71. The code has been released at:
https://github.com/tangpan360/MicroRCA-Agent.
1 Overall Design
The proposed solution adopts a modular architectural design, with
the overall system comprising five core modules: data preprocess-
ing module, log fault extraction module, trace anomaly detection
module, metric fault summarization module, and multimodal root
cause analysis module. The modules are designed with loose cou-
pling, facilitating data interaction through function encapsulation,
which ensures both system integrity and module independence
with enhanced scalability.
The data preprocessing module undertakes the critical respon-
sibility of system data standardization. Its core functionalities
include: parsing fault time period information from input.json,
1This work is a technical report of our solution at the 2025 (8th) CCF
International AIOps Challenge. The official website of the Challenge is
https://challenge.aiops.cn.
and standardizing timestamp formats across log, trace, and met-
ric modalities to ensure accuracy in subsequent cross-modal data
correlation.
The log fault extraction module is based on a ”template + rule”
processing architecture. It first designs multiple regular expres-
sion rules covering different fault types. The module utilizes the
pre-trained Drain model(He et al., 2017) (error log-drain.pkl) for
automatic log template extraction, merging log entries with the
same semantics into templates with their occurrence counts through
template recognition and deduplication mechanisms, with precise
control over template matching parameters via the drain3.ini con-
figuration file. The module implements a multi-level data filtering
mechanism: file localization → time window filtering → error
keyword filtering → extraction and reconstruction of core fields
→ fault template matching and standardization → sample dedu-
plication and frequency statistics → name mapping and service
extraction, effectively compressing massive raw logs into high-
quality fault features.
The trace fault detection module adopts a hybrid detection strat-
egy of ”unsupervised learning + rule enhancement”. At its core,
it leverages the Isolation Forest(Liu et al., 2008) algorithm to con-
struct anomaly detection model, which uses duration data from
parent pod→child pod call chains during normal periods for model
training. The model training process involves extracting normal
data from 50 random samples, using 30-second sliding windows
to extract temporal features, and generating the trace detectors.pkl
model file upon completion. During the detection phase, anomaly
detection is performed on the duration of parent pod→child pod
call chains in fault periods to filter out significantly anomalous
call chains and their corresponding durations. Additionally, it
implements a status analysis function, extracting status.code and
status.message information from traces to identify call failure pat-
terns. Finally, it outputs two sets of results respectively: statistical
analysis of the top 20 most frequent anomalous call combinations,
and detailed status anomaly information for the top 20 most fre-
quent cases.
The metric fault summarization module designs a statistical
symmetric ratio filtering strategy combined with a hierarchical
two-stage LLM analysis approach. First, it performs mathematical
statistical analysis on metric indicators and uses symmetric ratios
to determine whether the statistical indicators of normal intervals
and fault intervals are highly similar, thereby filtering normal data
and significantly reducing the large model context length, enabling
it to focus more on potentially anomalous data. After filtering,
it conducts two-stage LLM analysis: the first stage is based on
Application Performance Monitoring (APM) data and database
component (TiDB) data, performing phenomenon summarization
at both service level and pod level, including business metrics such
1
Data Preprocessing
Unification of Multimodal Timestamps
Log Fault Extraction
File Location
Time Window Filtering
Error Keyword Filtering
Core Field Extraction
Fault Template Matching
Sample Deduplication 
and Frequency Statistics
Name Mapping and 
Service Extraction
Trace Fault Detection
IsolationForest1
IsolationForest2
…
IsolationForestn Status Anomaly 
Detection
Parent_pod1-child_pod1-operation duration1
Parent_pod2-child_pod2-operation duration2
…
Parent_podn-child_podn-operation durationn
train
Duration Anomaly 
Detection
Metric Fault Summary
LLM Summarization
7 APM Metrics + 12 TiDB Metrics
9 INFRA Metrics Service-Pod 
Summary
LLM Summarization
Node-Service-Pod Summary
Multimodal Root Cause Analysis
Multimodal Root Cause 
Localization Prompt
Agent Reasoning 
Results
Log Fault Extraction Results
Trace Fault Detection Results
Metric Fault Summary Results
input output
Final Results
JSON parsing
result.json
write
1749139802000000000
Timestamp
{
  "Anomaly Description": "The system experienced an anomaly 
from 2025-06-05T16:10:02Z to 2025-06-05T16:31:02Z. Please 
infer the possible cause.",
  “uuid“: "345fbe93-80"
}
345fbe93-80
Input Sample UUID Other Data
…
Input Data Parsing
Parsing
Log Data Trace Data Metric Data
@timestamp
2025-06-05T16:10:02Z
startTime
1749139802000000
time
2025-06-05T16:10:02Z
timestamp_ns     1749139802000000000
Conversion Conversion Conversion
Figure 1: Overall architecture of MicroRCA-Agent.
as microservice request response and anomaly ratios, as well as re-
lated indicators of database auxiliary components TiDB, TiKV , and
PD. The second stage combines the business metric phenomenon
summary from the first stage with node-level infrastructure data
to conduct comprehensive phenomenon analysis across three lev-
els: service, pod, and node. This approach effectively controls
computational costs while ensuring analytical depth.
The multimodal root cause analysis module is designed with
specialized multimodal prompts at its core, supporting flexible
combinations of log, trace, and metric data across three modalities.
The module adopts a multi-processing strategy to improve system
processing efficiency and integrates comprehensive fault tolerance
mechanisms and retry strategies. It ultimately outputs structured
root cause analysis results containing component, reason, and rea-
soning trace, achieving a complete closed loop from phenomenon
observation to root cause inference.
2 Innovation and Practicality
The innovation of this solution is embodied in its multi-level fea-
ture extraction and reasoning architecture design. First, the log,
trace, and metric modules each adopt highly targeted processing
and filtering strategies: the Drain algorithm is combined with
multi-level data filtering to compress log redundancy; Isolation
Forest and status code checking complement each other to identify
trace anomalies; statistical significance-based filtering is applied
to extract high-value metric features. This modality-specific ”pre-
cise extraction-information compression” mechanism, tailored to
each data type (log, trace, metric), significantly reduces the com-
putational and contextual overhead of subsequent analysis while
ensuring the integrity of key information. Second, the metric anal-
ysis component incorporates a statistical symmetric ratio filtering
mechanism and a two-stage phenomenon summarization frame-
work. After filtering out potentially anomalous data, the framework
organically integrates service/instance and container/node perspec-
tives, while preserving the correlation between business operations
and infrastructure at the phenomenon level, thereby providing se-
mantically interpretable evidence directly usable for subsequent
root cause localization.
In terms of practicality, this solution emphasizes a modular and
scalable architectural design, enabling flexible adaptation to dif-
ferent business and system environments. The functional modules
(log extraction, trace detection, metric summarization, root cause
analysis) are decoupled from one another, allowing for indepen-
dent deployment or on-demand combination. This design facili-
tates rapid implementation in microservice architectures of varying
2
Input Data (input.json) Parsing
345fbe93-80
input sample uuid
{
  "Anomaly Description": "The system experienced an anomaly from 2025-06-05T16:10:02Z to 2025-06-05T16:31:02Z. Please infer the 
possible cause.",
  “uuid“: "345fbe93-80"
}
1749139802000000000
fault start timestamp
1749141062000000000
fault end timestamp
2025-06-06_00
fault start time in 
Beijing time
other data
…
Parsing
Log file name: log_filebeat-server_2025-06-06_00-00-00.parquet         Trace file name: trace_jaeger-span_2025-06-06_00-00-00.parquet
Figure 2: Input data parsing.
Figure 3: Preprocessed input data.
scales and complexities. In terms of processing efficiency, the so-
lution significantly reduces the amount of irrelevant data entering
the analysis phase via strategies like hierarchical filtering. This
reduction in irrelevant data lowers computational and storage over-
head, thus making the solution well-suited for high-concurrency,
large-data-volume production environments.
3 Detailed Design
Centering on the demand for fault root cause localization in mi-
croservice systems, this solution constructs a complete system
architecture consisting of five modules: data preprocessing, log
fault extraction, trace fault detection, metric fault summarization,
and multimodal root cause analysis (as shown in Figure 1). First,
the data preprocessing module realizes the structured parsing of in-
put fault information and the unification of multimodal timestamps.
Subsequently, the log module performs multi-level data filtering
on large-scale logs and uses the Drain algorithm to extract log tem-
plates for deduplication; the trace module adopts a dual strategy
combining duration performance analysis and status verification
to identify trace anomalies; the metric module leverages large
language models to conduct phenomenon summarization for multi-
level monitoring metrics. Finally, all modal data are aggregated
into the multimodal root cause analysis module, which utilizes
the cross-modal reasoning capability of large language models to
achieve the localization of faulty components, the explanation of
causes, and the output of evidence chains.
3.1 Data Preprocessing
The data preprocessing module focuses on two core functions: pars-
ing input data and uniformly processing multimodal timestamps.
It ensures the consistency and accuracy of subsequent processing
for each modal data, thereby laying a data foundation for the entire
fault root cause localization system.
3.1.1 Design of Input Data Parsing
For input data, a regex-based extraction strategy is adopted to
perform structured processing on raw fault description files. The
system accepts input data in JSON format, which contains two core
components: an anomaly description and a unique identifier (uuid).
Among these components, the most critical pieces of information
are the fault start/end times (included in the anomaly description)
and the uuid.
To facilitate accurate matching of subsequent multimodal data
and filtering of data within the fault time window, the system first
parses and extracts key information from the input files. The core
information extracted includes the unique fault identifier and the
fault start/end times, as illustrated in Figure 2.
Timestamp Extraction Mechanism:The system adopts
the ISO 8601 time format standard and implements automated
timestamp identification through the regular expression pat-
tern (\d{4}-\d{2}-\d{2}T\d{2}:\d{2}:\d{2}Z). The extrac-
tion rule follows the strategy where the first match is taken as the
fault start time and the second match as the fault end time.
Time Index Generation:To enhance the efficiency of sub-
sequent data correlation, the system constructs a time indexing
mechanism. It generates time identifiers in the format ”year-month-
day hour” (e.g., 2025-06-06 00) for rapid localization of corre-
sponding data files. Additionally, fault times are converted into
19-digit nanosecond-level timestamps, providing a high-precision
reference for accurate time-range filtering. The preprocessed input
data is specifically illustrated in Figure 3.
3.1.2 Unification of Multimodal Data Timestamps
In response to the distinct format characteristics of the three data
types (log, trace, and metric), the system is designed with differ-
entiated timestamp unification strategies in a systematic manner.
These strategies enable the standardization of cross-modal time
references, as specifically illustrated in Figure 4.
Timestamp Standardization for Log Data:For log data, the
@timestamp field in ISO 8601 format is adopted as the time ref-
3
… timestamp_ns …
… 1749139802000000000 …
Unification of Multimodal Timestamps
Log data
… @timestamp …
… 2025-06-05T16:10:02Z …
Conversion
Metric data
… time …
… 2025-06-05T16:10:02Z …
Conversion
Trace data
… startTime …
… 1749139802000000 …
Conversion
… timestamp_ns …
… 1749139802000000000 …
… timestamp_ns …
… 1749139802000000000 …
Figure 4: Unification of multimodal data timestamps.
{"error":"failed to complete the order: rpc error: code = Internal desc = failed to charge card: could not charge the card: 
rpc error: code = Unavailable desc = timed out waiting for server handshake","http.req.id":"ce26e094-4de9-4056-9d7c-
08224c6b0a85","http.req.method":"POST","http.req.path":"/cart/checkout","message":"request error","session": 
"d9b5be96-796e-4ab8-96a0-50f56d1ab25f","severity":"error","timestamp":"2025-06-05T20:11:11.352341342Z"}
"{< ERROR ORDER POST CHECKOUT > < MESSAGE REQUEST ERROR SEVERITY ERROR > ""timestamp"" ""< 
ISO TIMESTAMP >""}"
drain
Figure 5: Log template extraction using Drain.
erence. The system parses the time format to convert raw times-
tamps into unified 19-digit nanosecond-level timestamps. After
processing, the log data is sorted in ascending order of timestamps,
ensuring the temporal consistency of the data and the accuracy of
subsequent analyses.
Timestamp Standardization for Metric Data:Metric data
stores time information in the ”time” field, which also adheres to
the ISO 8601 format standard. Given the multi-level distributed na-
ture of metric data in the storage architecture, the system employs
a recursive search strategy to traverse all subdirectory structures,
ensuring complete coverage of metric files stored in a decentralized
manner. The timestamp conversion logic remains consistent with
that applied to log data.
Timestamp Standardization for Trace Data:Trace data fea-
tures a unique time storage format, with microsecond-level times-
tamps stored in the ”startTime” field. In this study, precision
conversion is applied to extend microsecond-level timestamps to
nanosecond-level ones (by multiplying by a factor of 1000), achiev-
ing time precision alignment with other modal data.
3.2 Log Fault Extraction
The log fault extraction module serves as a core component of the
fault root cause localization system, employing a multi-level filter-
ing strategy to efficiently convert massive volumes of raw logs into
structured fault feature information. The fault information compres-
sion functionality of this module is based on a pre-trained Drain
algorithm model. It achieves effective compression of fault logs
by extracting templates from logs containing error fields and per-
forming deduplication on logs sharing the same template, thereby
providing high-quality structured log data input for subsequent
multimodal fault analysis.
3.2.1 Log Parsing Principles and Model Construction
a Challenges in Unstructured Log Processing
As unstructured information, logs record system operational
behaviors in detail. However, they also contain a large number of
irrelevant variables (e.g., timestamps, IP addresses, port numbers)
that impair analysis efficiency. While these variables hold signifi-
cance in logs, they tend to result in a multitude of duplicate records
with identical semantics but different expressions during fault pat-
tern recognition. Such duplicate records occupy valuable context
space in large language models without providing additional valid
information.
b Selection and Application of Drain Algorithm
After a comprehensive evaluation of existing log parsing tech-
niques, this study adopts the widely recognized Drain algorithm
as the core log parser. By constructing a parsing tree, the Drain
algorithm can effectively identify fixed and variable parts within
logs, and categorize logs with identical semantic patterns into the
same template. This process enables the conversion of unstructured
logs into structured features while compressing a large amount of
redundant logs. Specifically, the Drain algorithm extracts log tem-
plates, removes irrelevant variables (e.g., timestamps, IDs), and
merges logs sharing the same template into a single entry, thereby
reducing the data volume effectively. Figure 5 illustrates the log
template extraction process: in its output, all variables are parsed
into invariant content by Drain, which mitigates the interference
caused by irrelevant variables.
4
…, time_Beijing, k8_pod, k8_node_name, message, …
time_Beijing, k8_pod, k8_node_name, message
extract key columnsCore field extraction and reconstruction
File localization 2025-06-06_00 Log_filebeat-server_2025-06-06_00-00-00.parquet
matching the file name
Error keyword filtering
error: db connection failed
info: user logged in
ERROR: file upload failed
error: db connection failed
ERROR: file upload failed
keep only error logs
Time window filtering fault_start_time    faultl_end_time   
        time2                      time5
log1   log2   log3   log4   log5   log6
time1 time2 time3 time4 time5 time6
Fault template matching and standardization
[2025-06-05T16:10:02Z] error: db connection failed
[ISO_TIMESTAMP] error: db connection failed
Drain extraction template
Sample 
deduplication 
and frequency 
statistics
[2025-06-06T16:10:02Z] error: db connection failed  [ISO_TIMESTAMP] error: db connection failed
[2025-06-06T16:11:02Z] error: db connection failed  [ISO_TIMESTAMP] error: db connection failed
[2025-06-06T16:12:03Z] error: file upload failed       [ISO_TIMESTAMP] error: file upload failed
[2025-06-06T16:10:02Z] error: db connection failed  [ISO_TIMESTAMP] error: db connection failed  
occurrence count: 2
[2025-06-06T16:12:03Z] error: file upload failed       [ISO_TIMESTAMP] error: file upload failed 
occurrence count: 1
Name mapping and 
service extraction
tme_beijing, k8_node_name, k8_pod, message, occurrence_count
Time_Beijing, node_name, service_name, pod_name, message, occurrence
name mapping & extracting pod_name from service_name
Figure 6: Multi-level data filtering and processing workflow.
2025-06-06_00
fault start time in 
Beijing time extracted 
from the input
Log file name
log_filebeat-server_2025-06-06_00-00-00.parquet
log_filebeat-server_2025-06-06_01-00-00.parquet
log_filebeat-server_2025-06-06_02-00-00.parquet
log_filebeat-server_2025-06-06_03-00-00.parquet
match the file
Figure 7: Matching between time in input and log file names.
c Construction of the Pre-trained Model
The system filters all log records containing the ”error” field
from the full-volume log data in phaseone2 to use as training sam-
ples, thereby constructing a pre-trained Drain model. Through the
learning and analysis of massive error logs in the microservice
environment, the model successfully extracts and builds 156 repre-
sentative fault templates, which cover the main fault pattern types
in the microservice system in a relatively comprehensive manner.
3.2.2 Multi-level Data Filtering and Processing Workflow
The multi-level data filtering and processing workflow is specif-
ically illustrated in Figure 6, proceeding from file localization,
2The dataset consists of two parts, phaseone and phasetwo; here we
use the phaseone data for training. Source: https://www.aiops.cn/
gitlab/aiops-live-benchmark/phaseone/.
through time window filtering, error keyword filtering, extraction
and reconstruction of core fields, fault template matching and stan-
dardization, sample deduplication and frequency statistics, to name
mapping and service extraction. This process ultimately converts
massive volumes of logs into structured fault features while achiev-
ing effective content compression.
a File Localization
The system performs file matching using time identifiers in the
”year-month-day hour” format, based on the time information of
each input item output from the preprocessing stage, as illustrated
in Figure 7. By searching for log files corresponding to the target
time period within the project data directory, the system ensures
accurate localization of data sources within the fault time window.
5
node_name, service_name, pod_name, message,                                                          occurrence_count
aiops-k8s-04,  frontend, frontend-2, “{”“error”“:”“could not retrieve product: …, occurrence_count: 81
aiops-k8s-03,  frontend,         frontend-0, “{”“error”“:”“could not retrieve product: …, occurrence_count: 9
…
aiops-k8s-04,  frontend,         frontend-2, “{”“error”“:”“failed to get product …,           occurrence_count: 1
Figure 8: Output of log fault extraction.
b Time Window Filtering
Based on the nanosecond-precision timestamps of the fault start
and end times, strict time-boundary filtering is performed on log
data. The system conducts a range query using the timestamp
field, ensuring that only log records within the fault time period are
retained and effectively eliminating interference from irrelevant
information in the time.
c Error Keyword Filtering
A filtering rule based on the ”error” keyword is implemented
for log message fields. After analyzing a large volume of log
data, it is observed that faults are likely to occur in a large number
of log entries accompanied by the ”error” field. Therefore, log
entries containing ”error” information are automatically identified
and extracted, while logs related to normal business operations
are filtered out. This significantly enhances the relevance and
efficiency of subsequent analyses.
d Extraction and Reconstruction of Core Fields
Key information essential for analysis is accurately extracted
from multiple fields of raw logs, including critical dimensions such
as time information (time beijing), container identifier (k8 pod),
node information (k8 node name), and error message content (mes-
sage). A field simplification strategy is employed to reduce data
redundancy while ensuring information integrity.
e Fault Template Matching and Standardization
The pre-trained Drain model is utilized to perform template
matching for each error log. The system converts raw log mes-
sages into standardized template representations, removes irrele-
vant variables, and retains only core fault semantic content, thereby
enabling the extraction from individual logs to pattern categories.
f Sample Deduplication and Frequency Statistics
A deduplication strategy is applied to duplicate log records
with the same container and template combination (e.g., [[2025-
06-06 08:00,frontend-0,template0, message0], [2025-06-06
09:00,frontend-0,template0, message1]]). The system retains
the first occurrence record of each combination and simultaneously
counts the occurrence frequency of the combination (e.g., [2025-
06-06 08:00, frontend-0, message0, Occurrence Count: 2]). This
quantitative labeling provides an objective basis for evaluating the
severity of faults.
g Name Mapping and Service Extraction
The k8 node name and k8 pod fields in logs are mapped and
converted into node name and pod name respectively. Correspond-
ing service information is then extracted by parsing the pod name
(e.g., frontend-0 → frontend). Finally, the system reconstructs
the data into a standardized multi-level format, which includes
dimensions such as node, service, pod, error message, and fre-
quency statistics. This provides a structured data foundation for
subsequent multimodal fault analysis.
Through the processing workflow described above, the log fault
extraction module can efficiently compress massive volumes of raw
log data into a high-quality set of structured fault features. Specific
examples of the finally extracted faults are illustrated in Figure
8. This module not only significantly reduces the complexity of
data processing but also maintains the integrity and accuracy of
fault information, thereby providing log-level data support for
subsequent agent-based multimodal fault root cause localization.
3.3 Trace Fault Detection
The trace fault detection module is a critical component for fault
root cause localization in microservice systems. It adopts a dual
anomaly detection strategy to identify abnormal patterns in mi-
croservice traces from both performance and status dimensions.
Based on the Isolation Forest algorithm and a direct status code
inspection method, this module effectively detects duration anoma-
lies and status anomalies. The two types of detection results are si-
multaneously fed into multimodal analysis, providing high-quality
structured trace data input for subsequent multimodal fault analy-
sis.
3.3.1 Principle of Dual Anomaly Detection and Model Con-
struction
Distributed traces in microservice architectures contain abundant
performance and status information, yet abnormal patterns ex-
hibit diverse characteristics. Performance anomalies are primarily
manifested as a significant deviation of trace duration from the
normal range, which requires the establishment of a normal behav-
ior baseline through machine learning methods. In contrast, status
anomalies are characterized by the occurrence of explicit error
codes and can be identified via direct inspection. The combination
of these two anomaly detection mechanisms enables the provision
of more comprehensive fault feature information.
a Principle of Isolation Forest for Performance Anomaly Detec-
tion
For detecting duration-based performance anomalies, the Isola-
tion Forest unsupervised learning algorithm is employed. This al-
gorithm operates on the core assumption that ”anomalies are more
6
operation1
parent_pod  child_pod                         operation call duration list (less than 4000 values)
frontend-0_frontend-0_hipstershop.ProductCatalogService/GetProduct,  [113.19, 125.13, 2349.66, …]       IsolationForest1
frontend-0_frontend-0_hipstershop.CheckoutService/PlaceOrder,            [148.41, 18672.41, 153.59, …]              IsolationForest2
…                  …
frontend-2_cartservice-2_POST /hipstershop.CartService/AddItem,         [3544.81, 3925.68, 3876.12, …]            IsolationForestn
40min
30s
80 windows of 30 seconds…
fault start fault end
50 samples
30s
1 2 3
parent_pod1 child_pod1
parent_pod2 child_pod2operation2
average duration
50 samples×average of 80 windows of 30s = 4000 average durations (if there is data for each 30s window)
train Duration anomaly
predict
Figure 9: Construction of Isolation Forest training data and model training.
easily isolated in the feature space” and quantifies the anomaly de-
gree of data points by constructing multiple randomly partitioned
trees. Isolation Forest is particularly suitable for anomaly detection
in continuous numerical data, enabling automatic identification of
significant deviation patterns in duration data without the need for
labeled anomaly samples.
b Direct Inspection Mechanism for Status Codes
A direct inspection mechanism based on status codes is con-
structed, eliminating the need for a training process. The system
directly analyzes the status.code and status.message fields within
the tags of trace data, and filters out all abnormally statused invo-
cations through a simple conditional judgment (status.code̸= 0 ).
This method can directly capture explicit abnormal states and spe-
cific information such as system errors, timeouts, and connection
failures, providing deterministic anomaly evidence for fault root
cause localization.
c Construction of Isolation Forest Training Data and Model
Training
As illustrated in Figure 9, the construction of Isolation Forest
training data and the subsequent model training primarily consist
of the following components:
Training Data Source:In this scheme, data from the phaseone
stage is used to construct the training set. Fifty fault samples are
randomly selected, and a 40-minute time window immediately
after the end of each fault is extracted as ”normal period” data.
This approach is based on the assumption that system behavior
tends to return to normal after fault recovery, ensuring that the
majority of the training data consists of normal data.
Grouped Training Strategy:Training data is grouped ac-
cording to the service invocation combination of ”parent pod -
child pod - operation name”, and an independent Isolation For-
est detector is trained for each unique service invocation pattern.
This fine-grained grouping strategy accounts for differences in
performance baselines across various service invocations, thereby
improving the accuracy of anomaly detection.
Sliding Window Averaging Processing:During the training
phase, a 30-second sliding window is employed to process the
duration data as an event sequence. Since multiple invocation com-
binations of ”parent pod - child pod - operation name” may occur
within a single 30-second sliding window, and each combination
may appear one or more times, the average duration is calculated
for each combination that occurs at least once within the window.
If a combination does not appear, it is recorded as ”None”. This
processing method effectively eliminates random fluctuations in
individual invocation samples, stabilizes the duration feature, and
thereby more accurately reflects the actual performance level of
service invocations.
Anomaly Detection Threshold Setting:For the Isolation Forest
model, the contamination parameter is set to 0.01 (indicating that
the expected proportion of abnormal samples to the total is 1%),
and n estimators = 100 is used to construct 100 decision trees.
The model outputs an anomaly score: a score of -1 indicates an
abnormal sample, while a score of 1 indicates a normal sample.
3.3.2 Multi-level Trace Data Processing Workflow
a File Localization and Time Filtering
The system performs precise matching of trace files in the ”year-
month-day hour” format based on the time information of each
input parsed in the preprocessing stage. Using nanosecond-level
timestamps of the fault’s start and end times, it executes time
window filtering on the trace data, ensuring that the analysis scope
covers the complete fault time period.
b Invocation Relationship Mapping and Structured Extraction
Key dimensional information is extracted from complex trace
structures, including pod name, service name, and node name
obtained by parsing the process field, as well as the establishment
of complete parent-child relationship mappings for call chains
using spanID and references. The system converts unstructured
trace data into invocation representations containing ”parent pod -
child pod - operation name”.
c Duration Anomaly Detection Processing Flow
Prediction Data Processing:Anomaly detection prediction is
performed on all trace data within the fault time period, employing
the same 30-second sliding window strategy as in the training phase
to calculate the average duration within each time window. This
consistent processing ensures the consistency of feature distribution
between the training and prediction phases.
7
node_name,   service_name, parend_pod, child_pod, operation_name,              normal_avg_duration, anomaly_avg_duration, anomaly_count
aiops-k8s-07, frontend,        frontend-1,  frontend-1, histershop.ProductCatalogService/GetProduct, 11203.63505,          56375295.28801, occurrence_count: 32
aiops-k8s-04, frontend, frontend-2,   frontend-2, histershop.ProductCatalogService/GetProduct, 11480.30423,              57508444.49971,           occurrence_count: 31
…
aiops-k8s-03, frontend, frontend-0,   frontend-0, histershop.ProductCatalogService/GetProduct, 11371. 84608,             56044805.23074,           occurrence_count: 5
Figure 10: Example output of anomalous traces detected by Isolation Forest.
node_name,   service_name, parend_pod, child_pod, operation_name, status_code, status_message,          occurrence_count
aiops-k8s-04, frontend,         N/A,            frontend-2, histershop.Frontend/Recv., 13, HTTP status cde: 500, occurrence_count: 161
aiops-k8s-03, frontend,         N/A,            frontend-0, histershop.Frontend/Recv.,                                13,               HTTP status cde: 500, occurrence_count: 159
…
aiops-k8s-07, frontend,         frontend-1,  frontend-1, histershop. ProductCatalogService/GetProduct, 1,                  context canceled,         occurrence_count: 131
Figure 11: Example output of anomalous traces detected by status code.
Isolation Forest Anomaly Prediction:The pre-trained detec-
tion model is used to identify anomalies in the duration features
during the fault period. A dedicated detector corresponding to each
service invocation combination is employed for prediction (if an
invocation combination that was not trained before exists during
the fault period, it is ignored and no prediction is performed), and
anomaly labels are output (with -1 indicating an anomaly and 1
indicating normal).
Duration Anomaly Result Output:The system outputs the top
20 most frequent duration anomaly combinations, which include
the following specific details:
• node nameNode: identifier where the anomaly occurs;
• service name: Name of the anomalous service;
• parent pod: Identifier of the caller container;
• child pod: Identifier of the callee container;
• operation name: Name of the specific operation;
• normal avg duration: Average invocation latency during the
normal period (derived from training data statistics);
• anomaly avg duration: Average invocation latency during the
anomalous period (derived from actual statistics of the fault
phase);
• anomaly count: Frequency of anomaly occurrences (format:
Number of occurrences: N);
A specific example of the output of anomalous traces detected
by the Isolation Forest is shown in Figure 10.
d Status Anomaly Detection Processing Flow
Direct Status Check:Status code checks are performed on all
trace data within the fault time period, with no training process
required. Information on status.code and status.message is parsed
from the tags field of traces, and all anomalous status invocations
are directly identified through conditional filtering (status.code̸=
0).
Anomalous Status Pattern Statistics:The identified anoma-
lous statuses are grouped and counted by service invocation com-
binations, and the occurrence frequency of each anomalous pattern
is calculated.
Status Anomaly Result Output:The system outputs the top
20 most frequent status anomaly combinations, which include the
following specific details:
• Node name: Node identifier where the anomaly occurs;
• Service name: Name of the anomalous service (Redis is auto-
matically mapped to redis-cart);
• Parent pod: Identifier of the caller container;
• Child pod: Identifier of the callee container;
• Operation name: Name of the specific operation;
• Status code: Specific error status code;
• Status message: Detailed description of the error status;
• Occurrence count: Frequency of status anomaly occurrences
(format: Number of occurrences: N);
A specific example of the output of anomalous traces detected
by the Status Check is shown in Figure 11.
Through the aforementioned dual anomaly detection workflow,
the trace fault detection module achieves an organic combination
of machine learning-based anomaly identification and rule-based
direct anomaly checking. Duration anomaly detection provides
quantitative performance anomaly analysis via the Isolation Forest
algorithm, while status anomaly detection enables definitive error
status identification through direct checks. The top 20 most critical
anomaly patterns output by each of the two detection strategies
collectively provide a trace data foundation for subsequent fault
root cause localization.
3.4 Metric Fault Summary
The Metric Fault Summary Module serves as a full-stack monitor-
ing and analysis component for faults in distributed microservice
systems. It adopts a two-stage phenomenon summary strategy
based on large language models (see Figure 12). By leveraging
rule-based filtering and statistical comparison methods, it iden-
tifies significantly anomalous metrics. Furthermore, it utilizes
the reasoning capabilities of large language models to perform
phenomenon induction and pattern recognition on complex multi-
dimensional monitoring data, thereby providing high-quality phe-
nomenon description inputs for subsequent multimodal fault root
cause analysis.
8
Figure 12: Schematic diagram of two-stage large language model phe-
nomenon summary.
3.4.1 Principle and Method Construction of Large Language
Model-Driven Phenomenon Summary
a Limitations of Traditional Anomaly Detection Methods
In distributed microservice architectures, monitoring metrics ex-
hibit characteristics of high dimensionality, multi-level hierarchy,
and strong correlations. Traditional anomaly detection methods,
whether threshold-based or machine learning-based, often only
identify numerical anomalies in individual metrics, struggling to
capture the correlations between metrics and their business se-
mantics. Furthermore, these methods lack the ability to generate
semantic descriptions of anomalous phenomena, failing to provide
interpretable phenomenon summaries for subsequent multimodal
fault root cause localization.
b Phenomenon Summary Method Based on Large Language Mod-
els
In the metric data processing method of this solution, a large
language model is employed as the core tool for phenomenon
summary, fully leveraging its robust semantic understanding and
reasoning-inductive capabilities. By inputting the filtered monitor-
ing data, the model automatically identifies anomalous variation
patterns, correlation relationships, and business impacts, and out-
puts phenomenon descriptions with rich semantic content. It is
particularly emphasized that the large language model in this mod-
ule is only used for phenomenon summary and pattern description,
and does not perform fault judgment or root cause inference. This
lays a foundation for subsequent comprehensive root cause analysis
that integrates multimodal data such as logs and traces.
c Definition of Normal Time Period
The system defines the normal time period using a relative time
window approach. The specific rules are as follows: the normal
operation time periods are extracted as two intervals: one from 10
minutes after the end of the previous fault to the start of the current
fault, and the other from 10 minutes after the end of the current
fault to the start of the next fault. This definition method not only
ensures that the data in the normal time period reflects the stable
operation state of the microservice system (avoiding interference
from the ”aftermath” of faults) but also effectively reduces the
impact of business fluctuations during different time periods of
the day (e.g., high visit volume during the daytime and low visit
volume at night) by selecting adjacent time windows before and
after fault periods. In turn, it provides a more reliable performance
baseline for comparative analysis.
3.4.2 Multi-Level Monitoring Metric System and Filtering
a Pod-Service Unified Analysis Architecture
The proposed system uniformly processes the pod and service
levels, and automatically extracts service identifiers by parsing pod
names. For instance, pod instances such as frontend-0, frontend-1,
and frontend-2 are uniformly classified under the ”frontend” ser-
vice by removing their numeric suffixes. This design simplifies the
analysis complexity in microservice architectures while maintain-
ing dual perspectives at both the service level and instance level,
enabling effective identification of service-level common issues
and specific anomalies in individual instances.
b Application Performance Monitoring Metric Filtering
From the numerous redundant metrics in microservice APM
monitoring data, 7 core key metrics are carefully selected:
client error ratio (client error rate), error ratio (overall error rate),
request (number of requests), response (number of responses), rrt
(average response time), server error ratio (server error rate), and
timeout (number of timeouts). These metrics cover the core di-
mensions of microservice performance, enabling comprehensive
reflection of a service’s health status and anomalous characteristics
while avoiding the impact of redundant data on the effectiveness
of phenomenon analysis.
c Hierarchical Coverage of Infra Performance Monitoring Met-
rics
An infrastructure monitoring system covering both container
and node layers is constructed. The container layer includes 9
pod infrastructure metrics: pod cpu usage (pod CPU usage rate),
pod memory working set bytes (pod memory working set size),
pod fs reads bytes (pod filesystem read bytes), podfs writes bytes
(pod filesystem written bytes), pod network receive bytes (pod
network received bytes), pod network receive packets (pod net-
work received packets), pod network transmit bytes (pod net-
work transmitted bytes), pod network transmit packets (pod
network transmitted packets), and pod processes (number
of running processes in pod). The node layer com-
prises 16 node infrastructure metrics: node cpu usage rate
(node CPU usage rate), node memory usage rate (node mem-
ory usage rate), node disk read bytes total (total disk read
bytes), node disk written bytes total (total disk written bytes),
node disk read time seconds total (total disk read time in sec-
onds), node disk write time seconds total (total disk write time
in seconds), node filesystem usage rate (filesystem usage rate),
9
node network receive bytes total (total network received bytes),
node network transmit bytes total (total network transmitted
bytes), node network receive packets total (total network received
packets), node network transmit packets total (total network trans-
mitted packets), and node sockstat TCP inuse (number of TCP
connections), among others. Hierarchical monitoring ensures com-
prehensive coverage from microservice applications to the under-
lying infrastructure of specific deployments.
d Monitoring Metrics for TiDB Database Components
A specialized monitoring metric system is constructed for the
TiDB distributed database, covering three core components: tidb-
tidb, tidb-tikv, and tidb-pd. It includes database-specific met-
rics such as failed query ops (number of failed queries), dura-
tion 99th (99th percentile request latency), connection count (num-
ber of connections), server is up (number of alive service nodes),
cpu usage (CPU usage rate), memory usage (memory usage),
store up count (number of healthy Stores), storedown count (num-
ber of down Stores), store unhealth count (number of unhealthy
Stores), storage used ratio (used capacity ratio), available size
(available storage capacity), raft propose wait (RaftPropose wait-
ing latency), raft apply wait (RaftApply waiting latency), and
rocksdb write stall (number of RocksDB write stalls). This enables
professional monitoring and analysis of the data storage layer.
3.4.3 Data Processing and Anomaly Filtering Workflow
a Hierarchical Data Loading and Organization
The system constructs distinct data paths for file local-
ization based on monitoring levels, using each input date
information output from the preprocessing stage. Specif-
ically, APM business monitoring data is stored in the di-
rectory ”Year-Month-Day/metric-parquet/apm/pod”, infrastruc-
ture node monitoring data resides in ”Year-Month-Day/metric-
parquet/infra/infra node”, container monitoring data is located
in ”Year-Month-Day/metric-parquet/infra/infra pod”, and TiDB
database monitoring data is stored in directories such as ”Year-
Month-Day/metric-parquet/infra/infra tidb”. Through this hier-
archical file organization method, precise data localization and
loading are realized in accordance with monitoring dimensions.
b Precise Time Window Filtering and Data Merging
The system performs nanosecond-level time window filtering on
monitoring data at all levels to ensure that the analysis scope fully
covers the fault time period. Data from two normal time periods
before and after the fault period are merged. The 10 minutes
immediately preceding the fault period are excluded to eliminate
the impact of fault ”aftermath”, and random fluctuation effects
are removed by excluding the two maximum and two minimum
extreme values, thereby constructing a stable statistical baseline.
This processing method ensures the representativeness and stability
of data during normal periods.
c Significance Filtering Based on Statistical Symmetric Ratio
A significance filtering mechanism based on statistical symmet-
ric ratios is implemented, which calculates the symmetric ratios of
medians and 99th percentiles between the fault period and normal
periods. Stable metrics with a variation amplitude of less than
5% are automatically filtered out, while only potentially critical
abnormal metrics with significant changes are retained for the large
language model analysis process. This filtering strategy can com-
press massive raw data into a set of high-value abnormal features,
substantially reducing the context of the large language model
by approximately 50% in terms of token count. Meanwhile, it
significantly improves the efficiency and quality of phenomenon
summarization. Taking the P50 symmetric ratio as an example, its
specific formula is defined as follows:
P50 symmetric-ratio =|P50 fault−P50 normal|
P50 fault+P50 normal
2 +ε (1)
where P50 denotes the median, P50 fault and P50 normal represent
the medians during the fault period and normal periods respectively,
andεis a minimal value.
For the filtered key metrics, the pandas ‘describe‘ method is
utilized to extract comprehensive descriptive statistical information,
including key statistics such as median, interquartile range, and
99th percentile. Through a standardized data representation format,
monitoring metrics of different types and dimensions are converted
into structured inputs understandable to large language models,
ensuring the accuracy and consistency of subsequent phenomenon
summarization.
3.4.4 Two-Stage Large Language Model Phenomenon Sum-
marization and Output Generation
a Stage 1: Application Performance Monitoring Phenomenon
Identification and Summarization
The system first conducts a comprehensive analysis of mi-
croservice application performance monitoring metrics and TiDB
database component metrics, organizing filtered key abnormal
metrics by service type where each service includes data from
its multiple subordinate Pod instances; for example, the emailser-
vice contains comparative APM metrics such as client error ratio
(client error rate), error ratio (overall error rate), request (number
of requests), response (number of responses), rrt (average response
time), server error ratio (server error rate), and timeout (number of
timeouts) across Pod instances like emailservice-0, emailservice-1,
and emailservice-2, while integrating database-specific metrics of
TiDB components including failed query ops (number of failed
queries), duration 99th (99th percentile request latency), and con-
nection count (number of connections). A structured table with
comparative data between normal periods and the fault period
is constructed, and using a service-Pod hierarchical organization
method, the large language model is invoked for the first-round phe-
nomenon summarization (with prompt design shown in Figure 13);
the data comparison table adopts JSON format, which, compared
with Markdown, maintains clarity while significantly reducing
token usage (specific format presented in Figure 14), and while
analyzing Pod-level phenomena, the system naturally summarizes
service-level common phenomena and differentiated performances,
with the large language model only describing phenomena at this
stage without making fault judgments.
10
Figure 13: Prompt for stage 1’s comprehensive phenomenon summarization (The prompt is designed in Chinese; see source code and modify as needed).
Figure 14: Example of comparative data for business metrics and TiDB database components.
b Stage 2: Comprehensive Phenomenon Summarization and Cor-
relation Analysis of Infrastructure Machine Performance Met-
rics
Building on the analysis of application performance mon-
itoring data, the system further integrates machine perfor-
mance monitoring data from the infrastructure layer, en-
compassing both the pod container layer and node layer,
and by combining the deployment topology information of
pods on each node with the service analysis results from
Stage 1, it constructs a full-stack phenomenon view covering
three levels—application, container, and node—integrating con-
tainer metrics such as pod cpu usage (Pod CPU usage rate),
pod memory working set bytes (Pod memory working set size),
and pod network receive bytes (Pod network received bytes),
as well as node metrics including node cpu usage rate (node
CPU usage rate), node memory usage rate (node memory us-
age rate), node disk read bytes total (total disk read bytes),
and node network transmit bytes total (total network transmitted
bytes); the large language model is then invoked to conduct the
second-round comprehensive phenomenon summarization, with
data comparison tables also adopting JSON format that, after de-
11
Figure 15: Example of statistical data comparison for kpi key metrics between different nodes and the pods deployed on them.
Figure 16: Prompt for the stage 2’s comprehensive phenomenon summarization.
12
Figure 17: Output example of the metric fault summarization module.
scribing the statistical indicators of node-level kpi key, proceeds
to describe the kpi key indicators related to pods deployed on that
node to ensure a coherent data flow (specific format shown in Fig-
ure 15 and prompt design presented in Figure 16), emphasizing
the analysis of cross-level abnormal correlation relationships to
output a complete fault phenomenon description spanning from
microservice applications to infrastructure, while this stage also
only performs phenomenon summarization to lay the foundation
for subsequent multimodal root cause analysis.
c Structured Phenomenon Output
After processing via the two-stage large language model analy-
sis, the metric fault summarization module outputs a phenomenon
description that includes the following content:
Application Performance Anomaly Phenomena:Leveraging
the service-Pod hierarchical information, microservice components
and database components with significant performance changes
are identified. This includes changes in request processing met-
rics such as request (number of requests), response (number of
responses), and rrt (average response time); fluctuations in abnor-
mal metrics like error ratio (overall error rate), client error ratio
(client error rate), server error ratio (server error rate), and time-
out (number of timeouts); and variations in database performance
metrics of TiDB components, including failed query ops (number
of failed queries), duration 99th (99th percentile request latency),
and connection count (number of connections). This enables the
simultaneous representation of overall trends at the service level
and individual differences at the Pod level.
Infrastructure Machine Performance Anomaly Phenomena:
This section describes changes in resource status at the container
and node levels, including variation patterns of computing re-
source metrics such as node cpu usage rate (node CPU usage rate)
and pod cpu usage (pod CPU usage rate); memory resource met-
rics like node memory usage rate (node memory usage rate) and
pod memory working set bytes (pod memory working set size);
storage resource metrics including node disk read bytes total (to-
tal disk read bytes), node disk written bytes total (total disk writ-
ten bytes), and pod fs reads bytes (pod file system read bytes); and
network resource metrics such as node network receive bytes total
(total network received bytes), node network transmit bytes total
(total network transmitted bytes), and pod network receive bytes
(pod network received bytes), as well as spatial characteristics of
anomalies distributed across different nodes and containers.
Cross-Level Correlated Phenomenon Patterns:Through Pod
deployment topology and phenomenon correlation analysis, the
correlation patterns between service anomalies and infrastructure
anomalies are identified, and the distribution characteristics and
propagation paths of abnormal phenomena are determined. This
provides critical phenomenon clues for subsequent multimodal
fault root cause analysis that integrates log and trace data.
13
Figure 18: Prompt of multimodal analysis.
Through the systematic processing workflow outlined above, the
metric fault summarization module achieves the conversion of mas-
sive multi-dimensional monitoring data into concise phenomenon
descriptions. By fully leveraging the semantic understanding and
reasoning capabilities of large language models, this module fo-
cuses on phenomenon summarization rather than fault judgment.
It not only significantly improves the accuracy and completeness
of abnormal phenomenon identification but also provides a high-
quality semanticized metric data foundation for subsequent fault
root cause analysis that integrates multimodal data.
The output example of the metric fault summarization module
is specifically shown in Figure 17.
3.5 Multimodal Root Cause Analysis
The multimodal root cause analysis module serves as the core
decision-making component for fault root cause localization in mi-
croservice systems. It adopts a comprehensive reasoning strategy
based on large language models, conducting integrated analysis
of preprocessed fault log data, abnormal trace patterns, and sum-
marized metric phenomena to achieve automated reasoning from
multi-dimensional abnormal information to accurate root cause lo-
calization. By fully leveraging the cross-modal understanding and
logical reasoning capabilities of large language models, this mod-
ule provides final component localization and cause explanation
for complex microservice faults.
3.5.1 Input Data Integration
The system first integrates the processing results of the three modal-
ities. The log fault extraction module, based on the Drain log
parsing algorithm combined with a multi-level data filtering mech-
anism, compresses massive raw logs into high-quality fault features.
The trace fault detection module outputs two types of abnormal
14
Figure 19: Good case - ground truth range.
Figure 20: Good case - actual output values.
information: the duration anomaly detection results include the top
20 most frequent anomalies identified by Isolation Forest, covering
call relationships, performance comparisons, and anomaly statis-
tics; the status anomaly detection results include the top 20 most
frequent status code anomalies, covering error types and specific
descriptions. The metric fault summarization module outputs a
phenomenon description summary analyzed by the two-stage large
language model, which contains approximately 2,000 words of
detailed abnormal phenomenon descriptions, covering monitoring
anomaly patterns across node, service, and pod levels.
3.5.2 Multimodal Prompt Generation
Based on the integrated multimodal data, the system constructs
a dedicated cross-modal analysis prompt template. The prompt
design adheres to a structured principle, clearly identifying the
source, type, and analysis focus of data from each modality to
provide clear data understanding guidance for the large language
model. Meanwhile, the output requirements and format specifi-
cations are explicitly defined in the prompt, ensuring the large
language model can conduct systematic root cause reasoning based
on the multimodal evidence chain. The prompt design is shown in
Figure 18.
15
3.5.3 Structured Output Format Design
The system primarily guides the standardized output format by
providing output example prompts, ensuring the consistency and
interpretability of root cause analysis results. The output result
includes three core fields: Fault Component (component), Fault
Reason (reason), and Reasoning Process (reasoning trace). The
Fault Component field clearly identifies the name of the problem-
atic microservice component; the Fault Reason field provides a
concise and clear root cause description; and the Reasoning Process
field details the model’s analytical logic and evidence chain, laying
the foundation for result verification and subsequent optimization.
3.5.4 Result Extraction and Verification Mechanism
Due to the potential instability of large language model outputs
(such as missing closing brackets, inclusion of redundant explana-
tions, etc.), the system employs regular expressions and structured
parsing methods to extract standardized results from the natural
language outputs of large language models. It ensures the format
correctness of output results through JSON format verification and
guarantees the validity of key fields via content integrity checks.
For results with parsing failures or format inconsistencies, the sys-
tem provides retry and exception handling procedures to maximize
the quality of outputs.
Through the multimodal root cause analysis workflow outlined
above, the system achieves end-to-end automated processing from
heterogeneous monitoring data to fault localization. By fully lever-
aging the advantages of large language models in cross-modal
understanding and logical reasoning, this module provides an ef-
ficient, accurate, and interpretable solution for fault root cause
localization in complex microservice systems.
4 Result Analysis
4.1 Comparison Between Good Cases and Bad Cases
As shown in Figure 19 and Figure 20, the proposed intelligent fault
root cause localization system with multimodal data fusion can
accurately identify the most likely faulty components and key root
cause derivation evidence from the three modalities of monitor-
ing data (logs, trace data, and system metrics) through in-depth
integration. This demonstrates the effective implementation of the
designed multimodal extraction scheme. Furthermore, the scheme
is capable of making reasonable sequential reasoning, effectively
identifying fault hierarchy types, and determining the actual hier-
archical sources (pods, services, nodes) of potentially abnormal
data indicators. Ultimately, the multimodal root cause analysis
module can make reasonable fault root cause judgments based on
log fault data, trace anomaly patterns, and metric phenomena. By
effectively combining the multimodal analysis and logical reason-
ing capabilities of large language models, it achieves the goal of
reasonable fault root cause localization.
Furthermore, we also explored typical bad cases to further iden-
tify areas for improvement in the proposed scheme. As shown in
Figure 21 and Figure 22, the large language model exhibited hallu-
cination during the final root cause analysis (indicated in blue in
the figures). The relevant trace call chains were not actually input
into the large language model for root cause analysis, leading to an
incorrect reasoning chain. This may result in deviations in the final
fault root cause judgment and affect the stability of the scheme. In
subsequent work, optimizations may be implemented by adding
retrieval-augmented generation, jury mechanisms, and other meth-
ods. Additionally, after the competition released the answers, the
log-related module can generate more effective keyword filtering
templates through approaches such as enhancing the large language
model’s semantic judgment using broader and more representative
fault data, thereby improving log filtering capabilities.
4.2 Ablation Study
Table 1: Ablation Study of Each Component.
Log Trace Metric Score
✓× ×23.59
×✓×31.09
× ×✓42.78
✓ ✓×35.32
×✓ ✓48.58
✓×✓51.27
✓ ✓ ✓50.71
To further investigate the collaborative mechanism among the
components of the proposed scheme, we conducted systematic
ablation experiments. By comparing the performance of different
modal combinations, we revealed the unique value and complemen-
tary relationships of each module. As shown in the experimental
results in Table 1, in the single-modal experiments, the metric mod-
ule performed the most prominently (42.78 points), mainly due
to its two-stage LLM analysis strategy that effectively covers full-
stack monitoring perspectives across the service, pod, and node lev-
els; the trace module ranked second (31.09 points), demonstrating
strong capabilities in call chain analysis and identifying dependen-
cies between services; while the log module exhibited relatively
weaker performance when used independently (23.59 points), pri-
marily because the unstructured nature of log data limits the ac-
curacy of its standalone analysis. The dual-modal combination
experiments revealed significant synergistic effects: the log+metric
combination achieved the best performance (51.27 points), with
this strong synergy stemming from the fact that metrics provide
quantitative localization of performance anomalies while logs offer
rich semantic descriptions of faults—together forming a perfect
complementarity from numerical anomalies to semantic explana-
tions; the trace+metric combination ranked next (48.58 points) as
they share a natural correlation in the performance monitoring di-
mension; and the log+trace combination showed relatively weaker
performance (35.32 points) due to the lack of quantitative support
from the metric module. The complete three-modal fusion system
achieved 50.71 points, which, although slightly lower than the
51.27 points of the optimal dual-modal combination (log+metric),
still significantly outperformed other combinations—indicating
that the synergy between logs and metrics can cover most fault
patterns, while the trace module retains unique value in scenarios
involving complex call chain anomalies. Ultimately, the results
of the ablation experiments fully validate the scientific rigor of
the multimodal fusion architecture in this scheme, confirm the key
role of the metric module as the system’s core analysis engine,
demonstrate the optimal performance of the log+metric combi-
16
Figure 21: Bad case - ground truth range.
Figure 22: Bad case - actual output values.
nation, and provide important empirical support for constructing
an accurate and interpretable solution for microservice fault root
cause localization based on large-model agents.
5 Conclusion
This solution constructs a large-model agent analysis framework
for fault root cause localization in microservice systems, which con-
sists of five core modules: data preprocessing, log fault extraction,
call chain anomaly detection, metric phenomenon summarization,
and multimodal root cause analysis. First, the data preprocessing
module realizes structured parsing of fault input and timestamp
standardization, laying a foundation for multi-source data fusion.
The log module leverages the Drain algorithm and a multi-level
filtering mechanism to extract error templates and screen valid
17
structured log features. The call chain module combines the Isola-
tion Forest model with status code checks to perform dual detection
of duration and status anomalies. The metric module filters core
business and infrastructure metrics, and uses large language mod-
els to conduct two-level phenomenon summarization, generating
highly readable anomaly descriptions. Finally, the multimodal root
cause analysis module fuses the outputs of log, trace, and metric
data, and drives large language models to conduct comprehensive
reasoning through well-designed prompts, outputting structured
root cause analysis results that include faulty components, causes,
and reasoning trace. Ablation experiments fully verify the com-
plementary value of multimodal data and the effectiveness of the
system architecture. This framework performs excellently in com-
plex microservice fault scenarios, ultimately achieving a score of
50.71.
References
Pinjia He, Jieming Zhu, Zibin Zheng, and Michael R Lyu. 2017.
Drain: An online log parsing approach with fixed depth tree. In
2017 IEEE international conference on web services (ICWS),
pages 33–40. IEEE.
Fei Tony Liu, Kai Ming Ting, and Zhi-Hua Zhou. 2008. Isolation
forest. In2008 eighth ieee international conference on data
mining, pages 413–422. IEEE.
18