Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems:
A Survey and New Perspectives
NAN FU,Southeast University, Nanjing, China
GUANG CHENG,Southeast University, Nanjing, China
YUETENG ,Southeast University, Nanjing, China
GUANGYE DAI,Southeast University, Nanjing, China
SHUI YU,University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia
ZIHAN CHEN,Southeast University, Nanjing, China
Rootcauselocalizationistheprocessofmonitoringsystembehaviorandanalyzingfaultpatternsfrombehav-
ioraldata.Itisapplicableinsoftwaredevelopment,networkoperations,andcloudcomputing.However,with
the advent of microservice architectures and cloud-native technologies, root cause localization becomes an
arduous task. Frequent updates in systems result in large-scale data and complex dependencies. Traditional
analysis methods relying on manual experience and predefined rules have limited data processing and can-
not learn new fault patterns from historical knowledge. Artificial Intelligence techniques have emerged as
powerful tools to leverage historical knowledge and are now widely used in root cause localization. In this
article,weprovideastructuredoverviewandaqualitativeanalysisofrootcauselocalizationinmicroservice
systems. To begin with, we review the literature in this area and abstract a workflow of root cause localiza-
tion, including multimodal data collection, intelligent root cause analysis, and performance evaluation. In
particular, we highlight the role played by Artificial Intelligence techniques. Finally, we discuss some open
challengesandresearchdirectionsandproposeanend-to-endframeworkfromanewperspective,providing
insights for future works.
CCSConcepts:• Generalandreference →Surveys and overviews;• Computersystemsorganization
→ Maintainability and maintenance;• Security and privacy→Distributed systems security;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Microservice system, root cause localization, data collection, Artificial
Intelligence, cloud native
ACM Reference Format:
Nan Fu, Guang Cheng, Yue Teng, Guangye Dai, Shui Yu, and Zihan Chen. 2025. Intelligent Root Cause Lo-
calization in MicroService Systems: A Survey and New Perspectives.ACM Comput. Surv.57, 12, Article 325
(July 2025), 37 pages.https://doi.org/10.1145/3736755
Authors’ContactInformation:NanFu,SoutheastUniversity,Nanjing,China;e-mail:230229203@seu.edu.cn;GuangCheng
(Corresponding author), Southeast University, Nanjing, China; e-mail: chengguang@seu.edu.cn; Yue Teng, Southeast Uni-
versity,Nanjing,China;e-mail:yteng@seu.edu.cn;GuangyeDai,SoutheastUniversity,Nanjing,China;e-mail:230229204@
seu.edu.cn; Shui Yu, University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia; e-mail: Shui.Yu@uts.edu.au;
Zihan Chen, Southeast University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China; e-mail: zhchen@njnet.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be
honored.Abstractingwithcreditispermitted.Tocopyotherwise,orrepublish,topostonserversortoredistributetolists,
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions frompermissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 0360-0300/2025/07-ART325
https://doi.org/10.1145/3736755
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:2 N. Fu et al.
1 Introduction
With the development of microservice and cloud-native technologies, large-scale multi-service
applications have become flexible to deploy, scale, and manage in clouds [141]. Therefore, many
companies have started delivering their core business through cloud-based applications, such as
AlibabaCloud,Amazon,andTwitter[ 119].Despitesignificanteffortsinservicemaintenance[ 24],
faults are inevitable due to the large scale of the system and complex dependencies [83]. Failure
to promptly locate and recover from these faults can result in user dissatisfaction or significant
financial losses [14, 68, 102]. Therefore, root cause localization is crucial for maintaining cloud-
based online services [23,30].
There are three challenges to efficiently and accurately achieving the fault root cause localiza-
tion in microservice systems [138]. (1) Microservice systems are updated frequently, and the de-
pendencies between microservices change with updates. Root cause localization is challenged to
adapttofrequentupdates.(2)Microservicesystemscontainmulti-instancesofservices,andthese
serviceshavealooselycoupledstructure.Rootcauselocalizationfaceschallengesinconstructing
complexdependencies.(3)Usinglarge-scalemulti-sourcedataimposesanunsatisfactorytimeand
resourceoverhead.Amicroservicesystemcangeneratebillionsofrun-timedataeachday,suchas
metrics, logs, and traces. The challenge is to effectively balance the analysis of multi-source data
with accuracy and time overhead.
Theexistingworkcanbeclassifiedasdirectrootcauseanalysis[ 63,86,95,96,113]andindirect
rootcauseanalysis[ 19,20,44,67,69,80,85,108]accordingtoarootcauseanalysisworkflow.The
direct analysis typically usesKey Performance Indicator (KPI)correlation, anomaly computa-
tion, and spectral techniques. Such methods are often designed to ignore adaptability and fail to
make dynamic adjustments according to the system environment. The indirect analysis, on the
other hand, usually has two stages [15, 52, 67, 85]. The first stage requires a graph to represent
relationsbetweenmulti-services.Thesecondstagetypicallyusesrandomwalk,patternmatching,
and Markov analysis to infer root causes. Such methods are primarily designed for static graphs
[67, 85], ignoring the dynamic changes of the system, and the localization results rely heavily
on the constructed graph as a guide. Traditional analysis methods in both categories relying on
manual experience and rules cannot deal with large amounts of data and complex dependencies,
cannot utilize historical data, and have low adaptability to microservice systems.
Todealwiththesenewchallenges,AItechniqueshavebeenemployedtopreprocessdata,repre-
sentgraphs,andlearnusefulhistoricalknowledge.AI-drivenmethodsshowexcellentcapabilities
in dealing with a large amounts of data and encoding dependencies into uniform feature vectors
for different faults. In addition, some methods useDeep Learning (DL)to transform root cause
localizationintoaclassificationproblemandfullyusehistoricalfaultdata.Moreover,theyachieve
fine-grained interpretation of faults by designing neural network-based interpreters. There have
been fruitful studies on fault root cause localization during the past decade. This survey analyzes
exciting papers published between 2013 and 2024 and finds that AI-driven methods have become
more intelligent than traditional methods. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct a comprehensive
surveythatsummarizestherecentachievementsandshedsnewlightonfutureresearchdirections
to expand the perspectives of root cause localization communities.
1.1 Related Work and Contributions to the State-of-the-Art
Root cause analysis in microservice systems is essential to maintain stable delivery of business
deployed in the cloud. Traditional techniques for solving this problem have been discussed in ex-
istingsurveys,whichdifferfromours,asshowninTable 1.Comparedwiththeseexistingsurveys,
our survey further focuses on the data collection methods in benchmark and production systems,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:3
Table 1. Our Novel Contributions in Fault Localization in Microservice Systems and Differences from
Previous Surveys
Related Works Main Topics Key ContributionsData
Collection
AI-driven Root
Cause Analysis
Performance
Evaluation
Qualitative
Comparison
Sole et al. [120] /Circle /Circle /RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle /RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle
Surveying root-cause analysis models,
inference algorithms, and these
algorithm performance and scalability.
Soldani et al.
[118] /Circle /Circle /RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle /RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle
Overviewing qualitative analysis of
anomaly detection and root cause
analysis methods.
Arya et al. [7] /RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle /Circle /CIRCLE /Circle
Summarizing a first quantitative
evaluation of a common dataset of
application logs.
Zhou et al.
[145] /RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle /Circle /CIRCLE /RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle
Summarizing typical faults of
microservice systems, the practice of
debugging, and the challenges.
Ours /CIRCLE /CIRCLE /RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle /CIRCLE
Summarizing the lifecycle of root cause
localization, including data collection,
intelligent analysis, and evaluation.
Under the category of main topics, “/CIRCLE”, “/RIGHTCIRCLE/Circle”, and “/Circle” represent comprehensive review, partial review, and not review,
respectively.
which may significantly affect root cause analysis results. Correspondingly, our survey correlates
the type of fault data with the benchmark or production system. In addition, AI plays an increas-
ingly important role in fault root cause localization. However, no survey has analyzed AI-driven
methods and summarized the classification of AI’s role in this field. Therefore, our survey dis-
cussesthelifecycleofintelligentrootcauselocalizationtofillthegapandprovidereferencevalue
for researchers or practitioners.
Sole et al. [120] focus on root cause analysis models and existing inference algorithms, empha-
sizing the algorithm performance and scalability for IT systems. Their survey aims to guide the
growingneedfordifferentanalysistechniquestoadaptperformanceandscalability.Inaddition,it
provides guidance for selecting optimal root-cause analysis strategies based on the requirements
of specific systems and applications. Soldani et al. [118] provide a structured overview and quali-
tative analysis of anomaly detection and root cause analysis techniques in microservice systems.
Compared with Sole et al. [120], the survey by Soldani et al. [118] focuses more on the qualita-
tiveanalysisofmethods,mainlycontainingthetypesofanomalies,theclassificationofroot-cause
analysis methods, and the types of root causes.
S o l ee ta l .[120] and Soldani et al. [118] can complement our survey. However, our survey sum-
marizes in more detail the evaluation criteria and application for the effectiveness of root cause
analysis, as well as analyzing the efficiency of existing methods. In addition, our survey qualita-
tively analyzes the existing methods from a new perspective,mainly containing the interpretable,
adaptive,scalable,practical,andmulti-sourceofthesemethods.Furthermore,basedonthesurvey
by Soldani et al. [118], our survey summarizes the localization level and granularity of existing
methods. Since the above two studies surveyed by Sole et al. [120] and Soldani et al. [118]f o -
cus on methods before 2022, neither analyzes AI-driven root cause analysis methods. Besides, the
two studies lack detailed descriptions of observability, data collection methods in benchmark and
production systems and publicly available datasets.
Arya et al. [7] provide a first quantitative evaluation considering Granger causality-based tech-
niques based on a benchmarking system, Train Ticket, deployed in a Kubernetes cluster and a
publicly labeled log dataset. Their survey [7] compares the performance of 10 root cause analysis
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:4 N. Fu et al.
methods in terms of time consumption, precision, recall, and F1. Thus, this survey by Arya et al.
[7] can complement the quantitative comparison in our survey. Compared with their survey, our
surveynot onlyfocuseson publiclylogdatasetsandonebenchmarkingsystembutalsodescribes
fourbenchmarkingsystemswidelyusedinrootcauseanalysisandanalyzestheircompositionand
communication patterns.
In addition, our survey also focuses on analyzing five existing public datasets. As a result, we
provide more comprehensive information on the preparation work for root cause analysis. Zhou
et al. [145] summarize the analysis results of typical faults present in microservice systems, cur-
rentdebuggingpractices,andchallengesfacedbydevelopersbasedonthedevelopedTrainTicket
benchmarkingsystem.Theirsurvey[ 145]focusesmoreontheproblemsencounteredinindustrial
debugging practices rather than comparing the differences between different root cause analysis
methods. Therefore, the survey by Zhou et al. [145] has a different perspective from ours, which
can serve as an essential article to guide the practice of fault analysis and debugging in microser-
vice systems.
1.2 Survey Organization
W eb e g i ni nS e c t i o n2 with key terminologies and a simple example to abstract the root cause lo-
calization workflow. Section3 introduces observability and examines data collection methods in
both open-source benchmarks and production systems, along with a summary of publicly avail-
abledatasets.Sections 4and5presentdirectandindirectanalysismethods,respectively,following
theframeworkstagesandhighlightingtheroleofAI.Basedonperformanceevaluationsandqual-
itative comparisons in Section6, we outline key challenges and future directions, and propose a
new end-to-end fault analysis framework in Section7.
2 Overview of Fault Root Cause Localization
Inthissection,wefirstintroducetheterminologyanddepictasimpleexampleofrootcauselocal-
ization in an online bank. Then, we propose a general analytical model for root cause localization
from a lifecycle perspective. Based on this model, we taxonomy existing papers according to the
fault localization process.
2.1 Terminology
We begin by describing the key concepts and providing a glossary for additional related terms, as
s h o w ni nT a b l e2.
—Microservice System and Microservice.The microservice system [64] is a system that
employs the microservice architecture, which breaks the system down into multiple light-
weight, loosely coupled, and independent services. These services are called microservices
[133]. For example, Train Ticket [39], a widely used microservice system for train ticket
booking, is broken down into 41 microservices, such as order, price, and seat.
—Cloud-native deployment environment.Microservice systems may useKubernetes
(K8s) technology for flexible deployment and communication in the cloud. The microser-
vices of systems are divided into separate containers and are managed in a unified manner
usingPods.Multiplecontainerscommunicatethroughvirtualinterfacessuchasbridgesand
underlying network devices such as switches and routers.
—Observable data in the Microservice System.Observable data contains monitoring met-
rics,logevents,andtracerecords.Themetricsaretimeseriesdata[ 71],mainlydividedinto
business-level and system-level metrics. Business-level metrics include interaction number,
rate,andsuccessrate.System-levelmetricsincludeCPUutilization,memoryusage,anddisk
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:5
Table 2. Glossary of Terms for Root Cause Localization in Microservise Systems
Terminology Definition
Container A container in microservice systems is a lightweight environment to run a
single service.
Kubernetes Kubernetes is a container orchestration technique often used to manage
microservice systems.
Network Device A network device is hardware that enables communication between nodes,
and external systems.
Physical or Virtual Host The host is a physical or virtual server running a Kubernetes node.
Pod A pod is the basic deployment unit in Kubernetes, used to manage closely
related containers in microservices systems.
Storage Service A Storage Service is a microservice that stores and manages data.
Virtual Interface The virtual interface is a software-implemented network interface, such as a
pod network interface, virtual network device, and virtual network adapter.
Fig. 1. The process of fault root cause localization for an online bank.
water level. Logs are unstructured or semi-unstructured texts that record more detailed in-
formationaboutsystemoperation,useractivities,andeventsofhardwareinteractions[ 131].
Inthissurvey,werefertothisdataaslogevents.Atraceisarecordoftheexecutionpathof
arequestacrossmultiplemicroservicesandisusedtotracetheprocessofarequestthrough-
out the microservice system. In this survey, we refer to this data as trace records, mainly
consisting of the trace ID, span, and context data.
—Fault. In a microservice system, a deviation in the service delivery process that is not ex-
pected to occur is expressed as a failure, and the cause of this failure is expressed as a fault
[97].
—FaultRootCauseLocalization. Inthissurvey,werefertotherootcausesthatcauseafault
in microservice systems as the fault root cause. The granularity of root causes localization
variesfrommethodtomethod,e.g.,LOUD[ 82]andDLA[ 111]achievelocalizationofanoma-
lous metrics, AutoMAP [80]a n dP A L[96] achieve localization of anomalous microservices.
Psqueeze [63] achieves localization of anomalous Pods.
2.2 Example of Root Cause Localization
Beforestartingtheresearchmethodologyofrootcauselocalization,weillustrateasimpleexample
appliedinanonlinebanktodescribetheprocessoffaultrootcauselocalization,whichisshownin
Figure1.Themicroservicesystemsoftheonlinebankingplatformrunwithinthedatacenterand
rely on the synergy of components, services, and instances (e.g., virtual hosts, network devices,
containers). This platform analyzes metrics to determine the fault root causes.
Whenafaultoccurs,thisonlinebankingplatformfirstusesmoderntoolslikePrometheustocol-
lect large-scale monitoring metrics (e.g., CPU utilization and the number of bytes a host receives).
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:6 N. Fu et al.
Fig. 2. A general workflow of root cause localization in microservice systems.
The scope of the fault, including anomalous pods, microservices, and hosts, is determined by sim-
ple detection techniques. Then, based on the anomalous data, and system information from the
ConfigurationManagementDatabase(CMDB) ,e.g.,deploymentinformationbetweencompo-
nents,itconstructsafaultpropagationgraphusingacausallearningmethod,e.g.,thePeter-Clark
algorithm. Finally, it uses a graph inference method, e.g., the Random Walk algorithm, to score
and rank the root cause possibility of each node in the graph, with the highest score being the
root cause of that fault. This process reduces the fault localization time and ensures the regular
operation of the online banking platform.
Thebankingsystemisaclearillustration,andsimilarrootcauselocalizationworkflowsapplyto
other microservice-based systems. For example, e-commerce platforms integrate tightly coupled
services–such as inventory, recommendation, and payment–where upstream faults can quickly
propagate.Likewise,contentrecommendationsystemsrequireprecisedependencytracingtoiden-
tifyfaultsinmodel-servingordatapreprocessing.Inbothcases,theworkflowusedinthebanking
scenarioisessentialforeffectiverootcauselocalization.Theseexamplesshowthat,despitediffer-
ences in system architecture and service granularity, the core stages of root cause localization are
widely applicable.
2.3 A General Framework of Root Cause Localization
In this section, we summarize the general framework of root cause localization, as shown
in Figure 2, which contains three components: data collection, root cause analysis,a n d
performance evaluation.
Datacollectionisthefirststepforrootcauselocalizationinamicroservicesystem.Itisessential
because data collection strategies may significantly affect the performance of root cause localiza-
tion. Existing approaches use open-source tools, such as Jaeger [54], Node-exporter [105], and
eBPF [35], to collect three types of observable data.
Aftercollectingdata,weclassifyexistingmethodsintotwocategoriesbasedonthestepsofroot
cause analysis, as shown in Figure2. The first types accomplish localization directly based on ob-
servabledata,calledthedirectanalysis.Anothermethodrequiresconstructinggraphs.According
to relation representations of graphs, existing graphs are mainly classified into causal and topo-
logicalgraphs.Then,traditionalmethodsmostlyuseinferencealgorithmssuchasrandomwalkto
determine root causes. Notably, AI-driven methods are gradually gaining more attention. In this
survey, we define the above methods as indirect analysis, which are commonly used in existing
research.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:7
Followingtheanalysisresults,theperformanceofrootcauselocalizationisevaluatedagainstthe
expected objectives. The traditional heuristic methods are typically unsupervised and are usually
measured by standard metrics, including the top-k accuracy (AC@k), average accuracy (Avg@k),
top-k precision (PR@k), average precision (MAP), and RankScore. Differently, some AI-driven
methods are supervised learning, typically using accuracy, recall, precision,False Positive Rate
(FPR), and F1-score. To depict the tradeoffs between effectiveness and efficiency, some methods
also useReceiver Operating Characteristic (ROC), time and resource overload. Furthermore,
it is essential to conduct qualitative comparisons of existing methods.
3 Data Collection and Analysis
Data quality directly impacts the root cause localization in microservice systems, making high-
quality data collection crucial. Therefore, we first introduce observability and its three pillars,
along with popular data collection tools (Section3.1). Next, we examine data collection methods
in open-sourcebenchmarksystems(Section 3.2)andproductionsystems(Section 3.3).Finally,we
summarize public datasets to provide standardized references for future research (Section3.4).
3.1 Observability in Microservice Systems
Observability is an emerging set of practices combined with tools to provide insight into the in-
ternalstateofasystembyanalyzingitsexternaloutputs[ 126].Withthewideuseofmicroservice
architectures,thecomplexityoftheinvocationrelationshipsbetweenmicroservicesmakesitdiffi-
culttounderstandsystemstateandbehavioraccurately.Thecoreoftheobservabilityinmicroser-
vice systems is to learn the state of infrastructure quickly and of services hosted in it, avoiding
extended outages, and during an outage, quickly enable root cause localization of the problem
[127].
Monitoring is the systematic process of collecting and analyzing metrics or logs. Monitoring
tools such as cAdvisor [42] can help track errors, identify issues, and send alerts–however, tra-
ditional monitoring struggles to provide a fine-grained, comprehensive view of microservice sys-
tems. Observability goes beyond monitoring and helps expedite problem resolution by providing
actionable insights. An observability strategy can dig deeper into the “what” of occurrences in
microservice systems to reveal the “why,” i.e., the root cause happening behind the scenes [116].
The primary data collected from microservice systems are metrics, traces, and logs, as shown
in Figure2. Together, they are called the three pillars of observability [81]. Logs describe usage
patterns and activities in an application, server, microservice system, or another device [25]. Op-
eratorscommonlyusethemtodebugprogramsormonitorsystemsanddevices.Accordingtothe
content recorded in logs, logs can be categorized as application logs, system logs, and infrastruc-
turelogs[ 25].Inaddition,thecontentoflogsisusuallystoredinthreeways:plaintext,structured,
andbinary.Allthreetypesareacombinationoftimestampsandcontextinformationofevents.An
observability solution is designed to centralize events and log data to assist with troubleshooting
androotcauselocalization,allowingteamstogainvisibilityacrosstheentiresystemsandapplica-
tions.Metricsprovideinformationtomeasuretheoverallbehaviorandhealthstateofmicroservice
systems. A metric is a numeric value measured over time, associated with specific attributes such
as metric name, label, and timestamp [112]. Metrics, such as CPU/memory usage, request latency,
and throughput, can help operators understand the state of individual microservices. However, it
is not sufficient to provide a lifecycle of requests across multiple microservices.
Toviewtheentirelifecycleofarequestinmicroservicesystems,weneedanotherobservability
technique called traces. A trace can represent the end-to-end journey of a client request within a
microservice system, as shown in Figure3. It provides visibility into the request path and request
structure, which helps operators measure system status and identify performance bottlenecks
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:8 N. Fu et al.
Fig. 3. Lifecycle of request traces in microservice systems.
Table 3. List of Commonly Used Observability Tools
Observable Data Tools
Metrics Prometheus [106], Zabbix [140], Nightingale [3]
Traces Jaeger [54], SkyWalking [37], Zipkin [147]
Logs Fluentd [104], Loggly [117], Splunk [122]
or faults. Figure3 shows that a trace consists of multiple executions called spans. A span is a
request-response pair representing one execution of a client call [8]. For example, (R1, R7), (R2,
R6),arespans.Besides,requestsacrossmicroserviceshaveaparent-childrelationship.Specifically,
a parent-child relationship R1→ R2 indicates that to respond to a request R1, the microservice A
generates a request R2 to call the microservice B.
The Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF)hosts critical and open-source tools for
collecting logs, metrics, and traces to achieve observability [1]. In this survey, we list the widely
used tools, as shown in Table3. In addition to the tools used to collect the three types of data,
othercompaniontoolsexist.Forexample,Grafana[ 60]iswidelyusedfordatavisualization.More
importantly, although logs, traces, and metrics each serve their unique purpose, they all work
together to help operators better understand the performance and behavior of microservice sys-
tems.Therefore,afamousobservabilityframework,OpenTelemetry[ 98],isdesignedtocreateand
manage three types of data.
In addition to the ‘three pillars of observability’ of logs, metrics, and traces, one emerging ob-
servability signal shows an exciting potential: Continuous Profiling [2]. Traditional profiling is a
dynamic method to analyze the complexity of programs. By profiling, operators can determine
where the code spends its time and which hardware resources, primarily memory and CPU, it
consumes [49]. However, calling the profiler is a “heavy” operation based on stack traces.
Googleproposesacontinuousprofilinginfrastructurefordatacentersandpioneersanotionof
statistical profiling using time-based sampling [109]. Continuous Profiling has three main advan-
tages: low overhead sampling, time-aggregated format, and efficient storage [49]. Operators can
usethistechniquetounderstandresourceusagedowntothelinenumberandaugmenttheexisting
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:9
Table 4. Description of Open-Source Benchmarking Systems for Microservices
System Name Main Components Application
Train Ticket [39] Contains 41 individual microservices and 86 request types. Psqueeze [63], MEPFL [146],
DejaVu [65]
Sock Shop [87] Contains 13 individual microservices and 10 request types, and
communicates via HTTP-based REST.
RCD [52], MEPFL [146], MicroRCA
[136], FRL-MFPG [22]
Hotel Reservation
[40]
Contains 15 individual microservices and communicates via
HTTP-based REST.
Seer [41], [84]
Hipster-Shop [139] Contains 10 individual microservices and communicates via RPC. MicroRank [139]
threedatatypes.Therefore,ContinuousProfilingcansupportthreetypesofdatagathering.There
are many open-source analysis tools to collect data and evaluate application performance, such
as Pyroscope [107]. It can quickly identify performance problems, propose solutions, and reduce
resolution time. Continuous Profiling is gaining much attention in the observability stack.
3.2 Data Collection in Open-Source Benchmark Systems
3.2.1 Open-Source Benchmarking Environment. Benchmark systems are experimental plat-
forms to provide a controlled environment for generating fault data and evaluating the perfor-
manceofrootcauselocalization.Wefirstsummarizethefourwidelyusedbenchmarksystems,as
shown in Table4.
The most widely used is a train ticket reservation system, notated as Train Ticket. It is imple-
mented mainly using five programming languages and consists of 41 independent microservices.
Next is the Sock Shop system, an e-commerce site for selling socks, which consists mainly of 13
independent microservices. It communicates with each other via HTTP-based REST. A specific
microservice application includes a set of scenarios and each scenario includes multiple types of
user requests [146]. For example, the Train Ticket application has a Ticket Reservation scenario
thatincludesseveraluserrequesttypes(i.e.,tracetypes),suchasQueryAvailableTickets,Confirm
Ticket Selection, and Pay. MEPFL [146] proposes that the Train Ticket has 86 request types and
the Sock Shop has 10 request types. The third is a hotel reservation system from the DeathStar
[40]benchmarksuite.Thelastoneisaweb-basede-commerceapplicationmainlyusedtobrowse
products,addthemtoashoppingcart,andbuythem,notedasHipster-Shop.Thissystemcontains
ten microservices and communicates usingRemote Procedure Call (RPC).
Withthedevelopmentofcloud-nativetechnologies,thecontainerorchestrationtechnology,es-
pecially K8s, is widely used in the above benchmarking environment to provide scalability, flex-
ibility, and high availability to the original loosely coupled systems. It introduces the concept of
containergroups,denotedaspods,toachieveflexibleresourcemanagementandscheduling,stable
environment isolation, and intelligent network communication and service discovery. The use of
K8s in microservices systems has increased significantly since 2020.
3.2.2 Fault Simulation. Inabenchmarkingenvironment,generatingfaultdatausingfaultinjec-
tiontechniquesisanimportanttask.First,tocorrelatetheinjectiontechniquewiththefaulttypes
and injection levels, we summarize the fault simulation methods mentioned in existing papers, as
shown in Table5.
For network faults, the Istio [53], Chaos Mesh [17], and tc [51] are mainly used. For exam-
ple, Psqueeze [63] utilizes Istio [53] and Chaos Mesh [17] to delay/drop packets or HTTP re-
quests/responses. On the other hand, DejaVu [65] uses the Chaos Mesh [17] to randomly inject
faultsonnodesandpodsintheTrainTicketsystems[ 39].Forresourcefaults,thestress-ng[ 26]is
mainlyusedtosimulateCPUhog,memoryleak,andmemorystressfaults.Forexample,MicroRCA
[136] uses the stress-ng [26] to heavily exhaust the CPU at 99% utilization on the non-compute
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:10 N. Fu et al.
Table 5. Description of Fault Sample Simulation
Methods Fault Type Fault Injection Level
Psqueeze [63] packet and HTTP requests/responses
delay/loss on pod, API, microservice UseIstioand Chaos Meshto inject faults. microservice
pod, API
CPU hog Increase CPU utilization to 95%.
network delay Set the delay between services to 10ms-50ms.FRL-MFPG [22]
throughput surge Increase the request for concurrency.
microservice
pod failure
CPU hog on pods and nodes
memory stress on pods and nodesDejaVu [65]
packet delay/loss/corruption on pods
UseChaos Meshto inject eight types of
faults at random locations. pod, host
CPU hogRCD [52] memory leak
Usestress-ngto inject two faults in
five selected microservices. microservice
network delay UseIstio to delay requests randomly.
CPU exhausted Usestress-ngto exhaust CPU.TraceRCA [64] application bugs
(application packet corruption)
Use Istioto substitute responses with
wrong responses randomly.
microservice
API
container
network jam Use Chaosbladeto delay network packets.
CPU exhaustion Use Chaosbladeto exhaust CPU.MicroRank [139]
IO reads or writes busy UseStrace to delay write or read system calls.
microservice
CPU hog Usestress-ngto exhaust CPU.
memory leak Usestress-ngto allocate memory continuouslyMicroRCA [136]
network packet delay Usetc to delay network packets
microservice
configuration faults
multi-instance faultsMEPFL [146]
asynchronous interaction faults
UseJavaParser 3.8to parse and manipulate
the source code of microservices and
inject faults by modifying source codes.
microservice
intensive microservices. In addition, on the CPU and memory-intensive microservices, it uses the
stress-ng [26] to allocate 2048MB of memory continuously to simulate memory leak. Besides, the
Strace[123]isusuallyusedtosimulateIOfaults.Forexample,MicroRank[ 139]simulatesIOread
or write busy faults to delay read or write system calls for ten microservices. To minimize the
impact between different fault injections, it sets the duration of each injected fault to 3 minutes
and the interval between two injected faults to be greater than 6 minutes.
Unlike the above methods, MEPFL [146] focuses on application faults and implements fault
injectionbymodifyingtheapplicationcode.Itmainlycategorizesfaultsintoconfiguration,multi-
instance, and asynchronous interaction faults. The configuration faults are correlated with re-
source faults and unrelated to microservices’ business logic. Therefore, MEPFL [146] injects
this fault into any code randomly. The multi-instance faults are targeted at third-party cached
databases.MEPFL[ 146]simulatesfaultsbyinjectingfailureresponses,incorrectoutputs,andvari-
able assertion failures or exceptions. Besides, the asynchronous interaction faults are primarily
targeted at microservices that are invoked sequentially. MEPFL [146] converts sequential calls to
asynchronous calls to change the dependencies between microservices. Therefore, it simulates
invocation faults by injecting failure responses or variable assertion exceptions.
Therearedifferencesintheleveloffaultdatageneratedbydifferentfaultinjectionmethods.As
s h o w ni nT a b l e5, most papers inject faults into microservices, resulting in the level of generated
fault data being restricted to independent microservices, e.g., FRL-MFPG [22], RCD [52], and Mi-
croRank[139]. Differently, some existing papersthat have usedK8s have refinedthe level offault
datafromthemicroserviceleveltothepod,API,andcontainerlevels.ExamplesincludePsqueeze
[63], DejaVu [65], and TraceRCA [64]. It is not enough to limit the level of fault data to microser-
vices. When a method determines the root cause of a specific microservice, the microservice may
be partitioned into multiple pods deployed in multiple nodes, and each pod still contains multi-
pleindependentlyrunningcontainers.Therefore,futuremethodsaresupposedtoprovide further
information to improve the efficiency of fault localization.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:11
Table 6. Description of Data Collection Technique in a Microservice System
Collection Technique Data Type Data Level Data Collection Technique Attribute
Intrusiveness1 Complexity2 Generality3 Versatility4
Istio [53] communication data microservice medium high high high
cAdvisor [42] performance data container low low high low
Jaeger [54] trace record microservice high high high high
Node-exporter [105] performance data host low low high low
Prometheus [106] time series data
host
container
microservice
low low high high
eBPF [35]
communication data
performance data
system calls
kernel events
process behavior
network configuration
host
system
component
microservice
container
process
low high high high
1Intrusiveness: The data collection technique modifies the application code or changes the network configuration or
state.
2Complexity: The complexity of deployment and configuration of data collection technique, including cluster
deployment, network and system configuration, dependencies, and integration.
3Generality: The scope and breadth of the data collection technique.
4Versatility: The customizability and adaptability of the data collection technology, including configurability,
scalability, and support for multiple platforms.
3.2.3 Data Collection. We summarize the common data collection tools including Istio [53],
cAdvisor [42], Jaeger [54], Node-exporter [105], Prometheus [106], and eBPF [35] in benchmark
systems, as shown in Table6. The performance of different collection tools varies. Therefore, we
correlates the data types, data levels and tools, and evaluate these tools in terms of intrusiveness,
complexity, generality, and versatility.
The intrusiveness of tools means that these tools may modify application codes or change net-
workconfigurationsorstates.WhenIstio[ 53]isdeployedinaK8scluster,itprovidesmanagement
functionsbyinjectingsidecaragentsineachcontainer.However,injectionofthesidecaragentre-
quires changes to the Pod Spec file and redirection of application traffic. Therefore, Istio [53]i s
intrusive. On the other hand, Jaeger [54], a distributed tracing tool, requires modifications to the
application code to obtain request tracings. In addition, connecting to an application or a service
agent requires changes to the application configuration. Therefore, most distributed tracing tools
are highly intrusive.
Thecomplexityofthetoolsmeansthatthesetoolshaveahighlevelofdifficulty,mainlyinterms
ofK8sclusterdeployment,configuration,dependencies,andintegration.Istio[ 53]hasahighlevel
ofcomplexity.Itrequiresconfigurationofsidecaragentsintheapplication,thecontrolplane,and
additional infrastructure to support functions of the service grid. In addition, Jaeger [54] requires
additionalconfigurationtoachieveintegrationwiththeapplication.eBPF[ 35],apacketprocessing
technology that executes in the kernel, also has a high level of complexity. It requires the writing
of personalized eBPF programs to configure the system kernel.
The generality of tools means that the scope and breadth of these tools are not limited. Table6
shows the generality of all six tools is high. The versatility of tools means the customizability
and adaptability, including configurability, scalability, and support for multiple platforms. The
Node-exporter [105] is less customizable because it is mainly configured and customized through
Prometheus [106]. cAdvisor [42] is less customizable because it is mainly used for advanced
customization through integration with other monitoring systems. Furthermore, the data types
and levels show that the data types by the eBPF [35] are comprehensive, and the data levels are
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:12 N. Fu et al.
more granular than the data by the other five tools. Therefore, eBPF [35] has been widely used in
recent years [114].
Insummary,fromatechnologicalperspective,thecollecteddata–includingmetrics,traces,and
logs–servesasthecoreinputfordownstreamrootcauseanalysismethods,determiningtheperfor-
manceandgranularityoffaultlocalization.Thesemethodscriticallydependonthecompleteness,
accuracy,granularity,andtemporalalignmentofdatacollectedunderfaultconditions.Low-quality
data can significantly degrade the effectiveness of root cause localization. From an organizational
perspective, data collection represents the foundational stage in the root cause localization work-
flow, enabling subsequent root cause analysis and evaluation. By systematically capturing fault-
related system behaviors, the data collection process provides the empirical basis for developing
and validating root cause localization methods. In this context, root cause localization serves as
both the primary motivation and the downstream consumer of data collection, influencing the
design of failure scenarios and the selection of observable data.
3.3 Data Collection in Production Systems
After evaluating root cause localization performance with data from controlled benchmark sys-
tems,somestudiesapplythesemethodstoproductionsystems.Forinstance,Groot[ 128]analyzes
real data from eBay’s e-commerce system over 15 months, while Grace [110] uses a dataset from
theHipstershopMicroserviceSystemattheChinaConstructionBank.Unlikeopen-sourcebench-
mark systems, production systems have a complex microservice architecture with layered and
multidimensional dependencies between services. Real-world environments that closely interact
with users place greater demands on data collection and analysis than controlled environments.
Therefore,therearethreeadditionalchallengestoaddresswhenimplementingdatacollectionand
analysis in production systems.
First, production systems require real-time observation and analysis, but data collection and
processing cannot significantly affect system performance and user experience [28]. Therefore,
collecting data from production systems should balance data comprehensiveness with overhead.
Second, production systems generate large and diverse data. A single production system can pro-
ducebillionsofrun-timerecordseachday[ 76].Thismassiveamountofmultimodaldataincludes
logs,metrics,andtraceswithvariedformats.Therefore,itisasignificantchallengetocollectvalu-
able information from massive amounts of data that may have noise and achieve efficient storage
andanalysis.Third,productionsystemsinvolverealuserdata.Whencollectingdatainproduction
systems,itisessentialtoprotectsensitiveinformationthroughanonymizationandaccesscontrols
to comply with data privacy and security regulations [28].
Inrealproductionsystems,manycompaniesachievehighdatacollectionandanalysisstandards
by using the observability tools introduced in Section3.1. For example, Google uses a production
tracing tool, Dapper [115], to collect trace data for distributed systems. Ever since, many other
industrial companies (e.g., eBay, AWS, and Netflix) have developed their methods for collecting
multimodal data from production systems [61]. In this survey, we use Netflix, one of the most so-
phisticatedstreamingplatformsintheworld,toillustratethepracticesforcollectingandanalyzing
metrics, logs, and trace data from production systems.
Netflix combines Spectator [90]a n dA t l a s[89] to provide a near real-time operational platform
[91].Spectator[ 90]isNetflix’slibraryforcollectingmetrics,enablingthecollectionofvariousap-
plicationmetrics,suchasrequestcounts,responsetimes,andresourceutilization.Atlas[ 89]isthe
backendthatmanagesdimensionaltime-seriesdataforNetflixmetrics.AsdescribedinSection 3.1,
metrics are structured data. In Spectator parlance, a meter is a named, typed, and tagged configu-
ration, while a metric represents the value of a given meter at a specific point in time. Spectator
meters are created and controlled by a registry with four implementations: counter, timer, gauge,
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:13
and distribution summary [91]. By defining and using different meters, operators can collect vari-
ous performance and behavior data of microservicesin real-time. In addition, Spectatorconsiders
performance in high-concurrency environments to ensure that collecting metrics does not signif-
icantly impact application performance. Then, the data collected by Spectator is aggregated and
stored using Atlas. It provides an efficient query syntax that supports returning results in chart,
JSON,andimageformats.Besides,NetflixusesLogstash[ 36]todynamicallyingest,transform,and
ship logs, regardless of format or complexity. It can extract structure from unstructured data and
anonymize or exclude sensitive fields.
Without trace data, Netflix engineers need to sift through a mountain of metrics and logs from
variousmicroservicestounderstandspecificstreamingfailures.However,reconstructingastream-
ingsessionisacomplexandtime-consumingprocessthatinvolvestracingallinteractionsbetween
Netflix’s applications, its Content Delivery Network, and backend microservices [13]. Therefore,
engineers need practical observability tools to collect distributed request tracing in production
systemstoimproveproductivity.Netflix’sdistributedtracinginfrastructurehasthreecomponents:
trace collection, stream processing, and storage. It uses the open-source tracing tool Zipkin [147]
to collect trace data, Mantis [4] to process the stream of collected traces, and Cassandra [124]t o
store the traces. This structure enables the collection, in-time processing, and storage of traces
from various microservices.
In summary, collecting data in production systems needs to meet the high concurrency and
low latency to ensure a satisfactory user experience. Systems should improve existing tools and
adoptefficientdatacollectionandprocessingmechanisms,optimizingresourceusageandavoiding
performance bottlenecks due to data operations. In addition, the data collection process needs
to ensure the security and reliability of user data. By implementing these measures, production
systemsmayachievereal-timedatacollectionandanalysiswhilemaintaininghigh-qualityservice
for users.
3.4 Publicly Available Datasets
Toprovideevaluationcriteriaforrootcauselocalization,weanalyzethedatasetsavailableinexist-
ing papers and compare these datasets from three perspectives: data attributes, composition, and
level, as shown in Table7.
Table 7 shows that existing studies are mainly based on open-source benchmarking and pro-
duction systems. The benchmarking systems mainly contain the Train Ticket [39], the Sock Shop
[87],andtheHotelReservationsystems[ 40].Incontrast,somestudieshaveusedactualdatafrom
productionsystemstoevaluatetheirmethods.Theseactualdataisobtainedfromlarge-scaleappli-
cationsystemsincontinuousoperation.ExampleswithactualdataincludePsqueeze[ 63],DejaVu
[65], and TraceRCA [64]. The collection strategies of actual data require collaboration with large
service providers to adapt the complex dependencies. In the five datasets, only the RCD [52]d oe s
not use the K8s technique, while the other four use the K8s technique in open-source benchmark-
ing systems, which may result in differences in data compositions and data levels. Due to the
intelligent technology, the fault types are more diverse than traditional microservice systems. For
example, Psqueeze [63] adds fault types on pods, APIs, and microservices, i.e., packet and HTTP
requests or responses delay and loss. DejaVu [65] also adds packet delay, loss, and corruption on
pods. Correspondingly, the locations and levels of faults become more complex.
The experimental data mainly contains CPU and memory exhaustion, packet loss/corruption/
delay, and configuration faults, while the actual data from a production system still contains data-
base faults, disk faults, and service faults. Compared with the actual data, the experimental data
has simpler fault types and cannot solve many faults in the production environment. In addition,
thefaulttypesaretypicallyfixed,andtheexistingmethodneedstodefinethepossiblefaulttypes.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:14 N. Fu et al.
Table 7. Description of Publicly Available Datasets for Fault Root Cause Localization of Microservice
Datasets Data Source Data Composition Fault Level Ref
Dataset of Psqueeze
[63]
from production systems Includes six simulated fault datasets with different
parameters, and each dataset has 100 faults. pod
API
microservice
[93]
from Train Ticket system Contains 73 faults, including packet delay and loss on
specific pods, API, and microservice.
Dataset of DejaVu
[65]
from production systems
Data A: Contains CPU exhaustion on containers,
packet loss/delay on physical servers,
database session limit or halt.
server
container
microservice [92]Data B: Contains CPU exhaustion on containers, physical servers, and middlewares;
packet loss/delay on physical servers;
low free memory for JVM/Tomcat; disk I/O exhaustion.
server
container
component
Data C: Contains 2594 metrics, 41 failure classes,
and 99 faults on sysC, which has only one component component
from Train Ticket system Contains 8 fault injections, including CPU/memory stress
on pods and nodes, pod failure, and packet delay/loss/corruption on pods.
pod
host
Dataset of RCD
[52] from Sock Shop system Contains 2 fault types, and 38 metrics saved in a CSV file,
including CPU/memory utilization, the number of errors, and latency. microservice [10]
Dataset of TraceRCA
[64]
from production systems
Data from a real microservice system with over 50 million users,
which contains 5 fault types: CPU/memory exhaustion, host network error,
container network error, and database failures.
It has a total of 22 faults and 17,041 items.
microservice [94]
from Train Ticket system
Contains single-root-cause faults and multi-root-cause faults.
Single-root-cause faults include 3 fault types, which are
application bugs, CPU exhaustion, and network jam, and have 22675 fault items.
Multi-root-cause faults have 11 faults among the 200 faults.
API
container
microservice
Dataset of MEPFL
[146]
from Train Ticket
and Sock Shop systems
Contains 3 fault types, including multi-instance faults,
configuration faults, and asynchronous interaction faults. microservice [38]
For example, MEPFL [146] classifies faults as multi-instance, configuration, and asynchronous in-
teraction faults. However, different types and levels of components may have different faults. For
example, containers are prone to CPU and memory exhaustion faults, microservices are prone to
network communication faults, and container virtual interfaces are prone to network configura-
tion faults. In root cause localization, no research categorizes the high probability and repetitive
fault types that occur for different levels of components in microservice systems.
4 Direct Analysis for Root Cause Localization
Several studies achieve direct root cause localization with a single type of data [63, 96]. However,
they cannot comprehensively characterize a system’s state and complex dependencies. Therefore,
some studies combine different data types[131, 143]. In this section, we introduce direct localiza-
tion methods based on metrics, traces, and multi-source data, respectively. Specifically, we high-
light the AI-driven methods in this area.
4.1 Direct Root Causes Localization Based on Single Type of Data
4.1.1 Methods Based on Monitoring Metrics. Metrics may improve system performance and
mainly contain business and system-type metrics.ε-diagnosis [113], PAL [96], and Fchain [95]
analyze the performance anomalies.ε-diagnosis [113] eventually locates the anomalous metrics,
while PAL [96] and Fchain [95] locate faulty microservices based on the sequential characteris-
tics of the anomalies’ start time. None of the three methods can provide interpretable informa-
tion about fault root causes and only provide abnormal metrics or microservices. Moreover, these
methodsarelimitedtodealingwithlearnedanomaliesorfaultcharacteristics,whichresultsinthe
inability to analyze unseen faults.
To address the above problem, Psqueeze [63] is the first method dedicated to external root
causes,whichcontainunrecordedorunusedattributes.PSqueezetakesmulti-dimensionalmetrics
and their time series as input. A bottom-up and top-down search strategy is proposed based
on a more generic property of the data, i.e., theGeneralized Ripple Effect (GRE),w h i c h
is different from the work of Lin et al. [66], Gu et al. [43], and Ahmed et al. [6]. First, in the
bottom-up stage, Psqueeze uses a robust probabilistic clustering method based on the GRE to
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:15
Fig. 4. An instance of direct root causes localization using traces.
classify attribute combinations into different clusters. Then, in the top-down stage, Psqueeze
evaluatestheprobabilitythateachsetofattributecombinationsisarootcausebasedonascoring
function, i.e., generalized potential score.
4.1.2 Methods Based on Trace Records. Mostexistingstudiesusetracedata,whichcharacterize
the interactions between microservices, for fault root cause localization in microservice systems.
Notably,thereexistsomestudies[ 146]thattransformtheunsupervisedrootcauseinferencemodel
intoaclassificationmodelbyextractingtrace-levelandmicroservice-levelfeaturesequences.Itis
an AI-driven deep neural network that fully utilizes historical knowledge.
TraceAnomaly [73] achieves the localization goal by analyzing the service call paths and re-
sponse time characteristics from trace data, as shown in Figure4. Based on traces, it proposes a
novel feature characterization method called the service trace vector. This vector characterizes a
trace’s response time and service call path information. Using the service trace vector as input,
TraceAnomaly [73] designs an unsupervised DL-based Bayesian Network to achieve root cause
localization for functional anomalies and performance anomalies of microservices [118].
BothTraceAnomaly[ 73]andCloudDiag[ 86]considertheresponsetimeofmicroserviceinterac-
tionsinvolvedinatracetobecrucialforfaultrootcauselocalization.Inaddition,bothmethodsuti-
lizetheresponsetimefeatureswhileentirelyusingtheservicecallinformation,e.g.,TraceAnomaly
utilizes the service call paths to encode the trace vector, and CloudDiag groups the same requests
based on the call tree structure of the microservice requests. Besides, TraceAnomaly [73], Cloud-
Diag [86], and T-Rank [138] all need to be compared with a given threshold when assessing the
probability of the fault root causes. The magnitude of the given thresholds significantly impacts
therootcauseresults.Whenthethresholdinamethodissettobestaticorcannotadaptivelyand
dynamically adjust according to the systems, it may lead to false positives or negatives. In addi-
tion, pre-given thresholds require introducing an expert’s empirical setting, which is subjectively
biasedindifferentenvironmentsorteams.Therefore,dynamicandadaptivealgorithmsneedtobe
introduced to overcome the above limitations [32,100, 130].
In addition, GMTA [46] and Zhou et al. [145]c o n s i d e rt h a tt h ef a u l tr o o tc a u s eb e l o n g st oa
part of trace records and agree that this part differs from what is contained in the average trace
recordsforthesametask.Therefore,bothmethodsdeterminethefaultrootcausebycomparingthe
microservice relations corresponding to the average trace with those corresponding to the trace
tested. These methods are called the visual trace comparison in this survey [118]. Specifically, the
core idea of TraceRCA [64] is that microservices with more anomaly traces and fewer standard
traces have a higher probability of being the fault root cause. As a result, TraceRCA focuses on
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:16 N. Fu et al.
Fig. 5. An instance of direct root causes localization using multi-source data.
latency and HTTP status metrics for each microservice call, CPU and memory usage for each
microservice, network packet received and sent throughput, and disk read and write throughput.
To utilize historical data more intelligently, the AI-driven method, MEPFL [146], achieves fault
localization by training a supervised classification model. MEPFL first designs a fault injection
strategytogetlabeledfaultydatabyfaultsimulation.Subsequently,orientedtothecollectedtraces,
MEPFL[146]extractsmicroservice-levelandtrace-levelfeaturesfromfouraspects:configuration,
resource,instance,andinteraction.Finally,MEPFL[ 146]trainsfourmodelstodeterminethefaulty
microservice and type based on the extracted features.
4.2 Direct Root Causes Localization Based on Multi-Source Heterogeneous Data
Inordertoutilizemulti-sourcedatacomprehensively,somestudiescombinedifferenttypesofdata
for analysis.
CloudRCA[143]proposesafaultlocalizationmethodbasedonahierarchicalBayesiannetwork
modelusingthreetypesofdata,asshowninFigure 5.Thesedatacontainmonitoringmetrics,log
events, and underlying dependencytopologygraphs from the CMDB. It decomposesthe monitor-
ing metrics and uses anomaly detection to obtain anomaly metric sequences. Subsequently, this
method improves the log clustering performance throughNatural Language Processing (NLP)
to get log pattern sequences. For the extracted sequences from logs and metrics, it jointly charac-
terizesthemasafeaturematrix.Inordertoinfertherootcauseofafault,CloudRCA[ 143]designs
a hierarchical Bayesian network and uses thePeter-Clark algorithm (PC)to learn dependen-
cies from metrics. It is proven more accurate than existing methods and capable of dealing with
entirely new types of root causes never seen before.
Wang et al. [131] use logs and metrics data to locate anomalous metrics based on log anom-
aly detection. This method argues that if the value of a metric has a strong correlation with the
anomaly score obtained from log anomaly detection, it is more likely that the metric is the root
cause. First, Wang et al. [131] utilize DeepLog [34], for log anomaly detection based on the LSTM
model to obtain a score that characterizes the anomaly state of the system. In addition, consid-
ering the data imbalance problem, Wang et al. [131] use data augmentation techniques based on
theobtainedmonitoringmetricsandanomalyscores,whichhavebeenalignedbeforethisprocess.
Subsequently, it uses theMutual Information (MI)[101] technique to determine the anomaly
degree of microservices and the correlation of monitoring metrics over the same period. Wang
etal.[ 131]rankthecalculatedcorrelationvalues,andthesortingresultshowstheprobabilitythat
a metric causing the anomaly is determined to be the root cause.
4.3 AI-Driven Direct Analysis Methods
In the direct root cause analysis, we classify AI-driven approaches into three categories based on
the role AI plays in the workflow: the optimization of data processing, optimization of Bayesian
models, and modeling of root cause analysis.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:17
Both Wang et al. [131] and CloudRCA [143] utilize log events to benefit root cause analysis.
Sincelogsareunstructuredorsemi-unstructuredtextsaboutsystemoperation,useractivities,and
events of hardware interactions, both approaches employ NLP techniques to extract contextual
features of log data for data optimization. For example, Wang et al. [131] make use of the state-of-
the-art log anomaly detection algorithm, DeepLog [34], to extract features.
The traditional Bayesian network usually rely on manual domain knowledge and expert ex-
perience to manually construct network structures, which cannot prtform effective analyses for
complex dependencies. To accommodate this complexity, TraceAnomaly [73] combines the tradi-
tionalBayesiannetworkwithDL-basedmodels.Thisapproachallowsprobabilisticanalysisofthe
fault root causes by Bayesian inference, providing uncertainty estimation and interpretability of
the model. In addition, it also can leverage the powerful representation learning capabilities of
DLtopredictcomplexdependencies.TraditionalBayesiannetwork-basedapproachescannotdeal
withentirelynewtypesoffaultrootcausesthathaveneverbeenseenbefore.Therefore,CloudRCA
[143]hasaninnovativedesignofahierarchicalrootcauselayerinthebasicBayesiannetwork.The
use of AI in conjunction with traditional models has been demonstrated to significantly improve
t h ep e r f o r m a n c eo fd i r e c tr o o tc a u s ea n a l y s i s .
To utilize historical data intelligently, the AI-driven method[146], transforms the unsupervised
root cause inference into a supervised multi-classification. It chooses threeMachine Learning
(ML) methods, such asRandom Forest (RF), K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN),a n dMulti-Layer
Perceptron (MLP), to train the model. Compared with the traditional unsupervised root cause
analysis studies, supervised classification methods can fully utilize the relations between the
known inputs and the corresponding labels to learn, making supervised learning highly accurate
in determining the root causes. However, obtaining high-quality labeled data in a large-scale and
complexmicroservicesystemissignificantlytricky,whichplaceshighdemandsonfaultinjection
strategies, data collection, and preprocessing methods.
5 Indirect Analysis for Root Cause Localization
In this section, we divide indirect analysis methods into causal relation-based and topological
relation-basedrootcauselocalization.Causalrelationsrepresenttheimpactoffaultoccurrenceon
othercomponentsandfaultpropagationpaths.Ontheotherhand,topologicalrelationsrepresent
physical or logical service dependencies, inter-service invocation relations, and logical relations
stored in the CMDB. Graphs significantly impact the subsequent root cause analysis. Therefore,
we describe commonly used root cause inference algorithms in detail and highlight AI-driven
methods.
5.1 Indirect Root Causes Localization Based on Causal Relations
5.1.1 Graphs Representation of Causal Relations. Causal graphs.Causal graphs typically use
the Peter-Clark (PC)algorithm and variants [121] for causality discovery. In existing studies,
CauseInfer [19,20], Guan21 [44], FacGraph [69], Qiu et al. [108], AutoMap [80], MicroCause [85],
CIRCA [62], MS-rank [77,78], HRLHF [130], Zhang et al. [142] and CloudRanger [132]a l lu s eP C
oroptimizedPCalgorithmstoconstructrelationsbetweensystemcomponents.ThePCalgorithm
finally outputs a directed acyclic graph that characterizes the relations between the impact of
microservices or other-level components [48].
However, there are four problems with using the PC algorithm to construct causal graphs.
First, the PC algorithm only applies to systematic observation data and can only extract the
correlation between two consecutive variables [52]. Second, the PC algorithm needs to perform
more conditional independence tests to construct a complete causal graph, which does not apply
to large-scale microservice systems. Third, it has been demonstrated [52] that the large-scale
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:18 N. Fu et al.
metricsgeneratedbyservicesleadtoasignificantresourceoverheadinapplyingthePCalgorithm
directly to microservice systems. Some methods use feature selection techniques to reduce data
size [80, 125, 132], but these methods may result in the selection of metrics that do not include
the metrics of fault root causes. Finally, The causal structure extracted by the PC algorithm is a
directedacyclicgraph,whichdoesnotapplytorealbusinessenvironmentssincenaturalbusiness
environments contain cyclic dependencies.
Fault propagation graphs.Fault propagation graphs are commonly used to locate a subset
of components affected by faults [103], describing the propagation paths and impact ranges of
faults [22]. However, there are differences in graph construction methods and focus perspectives
across studies. For example, FRL-MFPG [22] characterizes both the propagation pattern of anom-
aliesthroughmicroservicedependenciesandthecorrelationbetweenthepresenceofmicroservice
componentsinthesameservice,node,orlocation.Itdoessobyaggregatingthe LinkCallGraph
ofend-to-endTracking(LCGT) andthe FaultCorrelationDirectedGraph(FCDG) ,whichul-
timatelyenablestheconstructionofthefaultpropagationgraph.Differently,Narayanaaetal.[ 88]
constructs a directed fault graph, where nodes represent fault components and edges are used to
characterize whether the occurrence of one fault triggers another fault, and probability weights
are introduced into the edges and nodes that lead to faults.
Inference graphs.To simultaneously model the dependencies between fault root causes and
observations, load balancers, and fault propagation redundancy relations, Sherlock [11] devises a
novel method for constructing inference graphs. The inference graph is a labeled directed graph
with nodes containing mainly root cause nodes, observation nodes, and meta-nodes. Flock [47]
focuses on the presence of faulty components in the data center network that do not generate
faultreports[ 50],called“grayfaults.”Itusescollectedtelemetrydata,networktopology,androut-
ing information to construct aProbabilistic Graphical Model (PGM)to characterize network
service interactions. Like Flock [47], Shrink [56] also implements fault root causes analysis by
constructing a Bayesian Network model.
5.1.2 Intelligent Root Cause Localization. Based on constructed graphs, existing research uses
different inference methods to determine root causes. Most traditional methods are random walk
algorithms[5],Breadth-FirstSearch(BFS) orDepth-FirstSearch(DFS) [19,20,108],andgraph
analysis[69].Inparticular,AIinrootcausesinferenceisgraduallygainingprominence[ 65].Read-
ers can attain deeper views in this survey [45] to understand causality learning.
Random Walk.Random Walk is a graph search algorithm that achieves fault root causes lo-
calization by restricting the search direction to regions that contain more favorable information.
In existing root cause localization methods, traditional random walk [21], second-order random
walk [79], and optimized random walk [85] methods are commonly used. Specifically, Aggarwal
et al. [5], MicroDiag [135], and TON18 [133] use the traditional random walk method, which is a
statistical model consisting of a series of trajectories [85], and each step selection is randomized.
However, the traditional random walk algorithm follows Markovianity, i.e., the next node to be
visiteddependsonlyonthecurrentnode.Thismethodcannotcapturehigher-orderdependencies,
anddeepinferenceforcausalityisflawed.Therefore,somemethods[ 79,132]usethesecond-order
random walk algorithm for root cause localization. For example, ServiceRank [79] determines the
path for the random walk by considering the correlation of impacts between microservices when
a fault occurs. In addition, some studies have updated and designed personalized random walk
algorithms based on constructed graphs.
BFS and DFS. Microscope [67], Qiu et al. [108], and CauseInfer [19, 20]v i e wr o o tc a u s e
localization as a path search problem. Microscope [67] uses the BFS algorithm to start searching
from the anomalous node of the causal graph while searching in the opposite direction. Similar
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:19
to Microscope [67], Qiu et al. [108] also uses a search strategy based on the BFS algorithm,
primarily determining the best search path using a queue to store vector-type paths. Unlike
Microscope [67] and Qiu et al. [108], CauseInfer [19, 20] primarily uses the DFS algorithm to
search for metrics-based causal graphs. It considers an anomalous node the fault root cause in
a tree structure composed of anomalous nodes when the anomalous node is a leaf node or the
descendants do not contain anomalous nodes.
AI-drivenanalysis. SomestudieshaveusedAImethodstoachieverootcauselocalization.For
example, DejaVu [65] introduces a concept to characterize faults comprehensively, i.e., “failure
units,” to improve the interpretability of root causes. It maps the metrics of all failure units from
the same type of faults into fixed-length feature vectors and trains a feature extraction model for
each fault type. Subsequently, to model the propagation patterns of faults, DejaVu [65] designs
feature aggregation models based on an attention mechanism, which encodes the structural in-
formation of a graph into aggregated feature vectors. Ultimately, it determines whether a failure
unit is the fault root cause by designing a binary classification model that scores each failure unit.
Furthermore, to reduce the search scope and the number of queries, HRLHF [130]u s e saRein-
forcement Learning (RL)architecture to reduce the number of queries from O(n2) to O(1).I t
firstconstructsaninitialgraphofservicedependenciesandlearnstheunderlyingcausaldiscovery
strategythroughasupervisedlearningmodel.Subsequently,itusesthecollectedhumanfeedback
to train a reward model and optimizes the causal discovery strategy by the reward model.
5.2 Indirect Root Causes Localization Based on Topological Relations
Murphy [48] classifies the graph structures used to characterize dependencies between instances
into two types: dependency graphs [125, 129, 134, 144] and relationship graphs [48, 57]. Depen-
dency graphs are directed acyclic graphs that characterize known dependencies, in particular, us-
ingmicroserviceinvocationgraphstocharacterizedependencies.Ontheotherhand,relationship
graphs require modeling potential dependencies based on known dependencies.
5.2.1 Dependency Graphs Representation. Dependency graphs based on service-level de-
pendencies. Most methods based on the dependency graphs usually analyze the service-level
dependencies, such as AAMR [144], ModelCoder [16], Wu et al. [134], TRACE DIA G [32], Grace
[110], MicroMILTS [137], MicroHECL [70]. For example, AAMR [144] constructs a service depen-
dency graph based on the network connections between microservices and uses a personalized
PageRank algorithm [55] to rank the possible fault root causes. However, these methods have
some problems. Therefore, some methods have proposed new solution ideas using AI in three as-
pects: feature characterization, simplification of the graph structure, and modeling of root cause
inference.
Some methods use feature encoding methods, like LSTM deep learning models, to transform
the graph structures into uniform feature vectors based on service dependency graphs, such as
MicroMILTS [137] and ModelCoder [16]. MicroMILTS [137] argues that frequent and complex
invocations between microservices generate large-scale performance metrics, which makes it im-
practical to find metric bottlenecks in large-scale metrics by setting thresholds. ModelCoder [16]
proposes a novel method for encoding the features of nodes. It categorizes the features of a node
into four types: the features of the target node itself, its parent nodes, child nodes, and bidirec-
tional nodes. Different coding features are formed for different fault types. Finally, ModelCoder
determines the fault root cause by automatically matching feature vectors between known and
to-be-tested faults. Besides,TRACE DIA G [32]a n dH R L H F[130] introduce RL to achieve pruning
of redundant parts of the service dependency graph. These methods collect large-scale individual
trace records and aggregate these trace records based on time sequences.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:20 N. Fu et al.
Based on the constructed service dependency graphs, there exist some methods [18, 41, 110]
thatusetheDLtodeterminethefaultrootcauses.Forexample,Grace[ 110]proposesasupervised
classificationmethodthatimplementsarootcauselocalizationwithstronginterpretability.Itcan
identify the microservice that causes the fault and provide anomaly metrics, the type of fault that
occurred, and related dependency information associated with the faulty microservice. Similarly,
Chenetal.[ 18]implement thefaultlocalizationofmicroservicesbytrainingasupervisedclassifi-
cationmodelDNNbasedontracerecords.Ontheotherhand,tosolvetheperformanceprediction
problem in microservice systems, Seer [41] uses CNN and LSTM models to learn QoS conflicts’
temporal and spatial features and locate the root-cause microservices that trigger performance
degradation.
Dependencygraphsbasedonfine-grainedandmulti-leveldependencies. Severalstudies
[14,29,48,57,74,111] further analyze finer-grained, multi-level dependencies. DLA [111] targets
Kubernetes-based microservice systems by dividing the system architecture into five layers and
analyzing the data dependencies across them. NetMedic [57] classifies components into five cat-
egories based on fault types: application processes, hosts, network paths, firewall configurations,
andvirtualcomponentsusedtorepresentthebehaviorofcommunicatingobjectsinaprocess.This
method determines the level of root causes analysis based on the level of components being mod-
eled.Inaddition,Dandonaetal.[ 29]proposeadynamicmulti-leveldependencygraphcontaining
anapplicationandservicelayer,avirtualizedcomputationallayer,aphysicalcomputationallayer,
and a vital support system layer from the top down.
The above methods determine the fault root cause based on the constructed service-level or
multi-leveldependencygraph[ 113].Weproposethatthepresenceofnoisydataduringthegraph
construction process may have a significant impact on the final localization results. However, the
localization results of these methods depend heavily on the quality of constructed graphs. When
the quality of graphs is low, the effectiveness of these methods is flawed.
5.2.2 Relationship Graphs Representation. Murphy [48] introduces the relationship graph and
designs the relationship graph to model potential dependencies. Similarly, NetMedic [57]a d o p t s
theconceptofrelationshipgraphsbasedondependencygraphs.However,comparedwithMurphy,
NetMedicusesafixedheuristicalgorithmtoimplementrootcauseinference,makingitineffective
in an actual network environment. Therefore, Murphy utilizes multi-level monitoring metrics to
obtain some descriptions of a set of entities associatedwith a fault. The above graph construction
methodcharacterizestwoentitiesashavingpotentialdependenciesintwodirections,whichdiffers
fromtraditionaldependencygraphs.Whenthedependenciesbetweentwoentitiesbecomeknown
throughmetricsdata,e.g.,itisclearthatEntity AdependsonEntity B,Murphyusesdirectededges
pointing from EntityA to EntityB instead of directed edges in the original two directions. With
thisdesign,Murphyensuresthatpotentialdependenciesbetweenentitiesareanalyzedinthemost
general method possible.
5.2.3 Comparison of Indirect Analysis Methods. Table 8 recaps the surveyed methods based
on topological relations from three perspectives:input data, inference techniques,a n droot
causegranularity.Itprovidestherequireddatalevel,i.e.,whethertheycontainonlyapplication-
or service-level data or whether they also contain other-level data. In addition, we summarize the
common techniques to achieve root cause inference. Different inference methods ultimately land
on identifying faults at different granularities. Therefore, we classify the localization granularity.
Taking Table8 as a reference, we hereafter analyze challenges faced by two graph-based indi-
rect root cause analyses. The two graph structures have differences in construction perspective
and focus. For adaptability in actual network environments, it has been shown [79]t h a tc a u s a l
relations-based graphs are more accurate than topological relations-based graphs because the
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:21
Table 8. Classification of Root Causes Localization Based on Topological Relations, Based on Their Class
(viz., Y for using AI Techniques, N for not using AI Techniques)
Methods Class Input Data Inference Techniques Root Cause Granularity
AAMR [144] N system and application-level metrics personalized PageRank microservices and their
anomaly metrics
Wu et al. [134] N system, application,
and network-level metrics personalized PageRank microservices and their
anomaly metrics
MicroRCA [136] N system and application-level metrics personalized PageRank microservices
ModelCoder [16] N application and underlying service-level metrics feature matching microservices and their features
MicroMILTS [137] N container-level metrics PageRank microservices
MicroHECL [70] N application-level metrics BFS microservices and fault types
MonitorRank [58] N time-series metrics personalized PageRank metrics
Sieve [125] N application-level metrics and statistics
on the operation of system components KPI correlation analysis system components and corresponding
metric categories
RCSF [129] N application-level performance metrics sequence pattern mining [9] system components
TRACE DIA G [32] Y trace records graphical causal model [15] multi-level system components
MicroRank [139] N trace records spectrum analysis microservices
Chen et al. [18] Y trace records multiple classification
based on supervised DL microservices
Seer [41] Y trace records DL with multiple models microservices
ADGS [75] N response time and system performance metricsgraph similarity computation microservices and physical nodes
DLA [111] Y multi-level performance metrics Markov analysis metrics
Dandona et al. [29] N Full range of performance metrics
across hardware and software inference length method [120] hardware and software components
NetMedic [57] N multi-level performance metrics, such as
application process, host, and configuration KPI correlation analysis multi-level system components
Murphy [48] Y multi-level performance metrics,
such as application, host, and VM markov random field (MRF) Multi-level components, fault types,
and dependencies
GraphRCA [14] N metrics, logs, and network operations pattern matching system components
Grace [110] Y application and underlying
service-level metrics and trace records
binary classification
based on supervised DL
microservices and their metrics,
failure types, and dependencies
In theInput Datacolumn: single-level metrics; multi-level metrics; trace records; multi-source heterogeneous
data. In theRoot Cause Granularitycolumn: components/components and related information;
microservices/microservices and related information; anomalous metrics.
former focuses more on anomaly correlation in its construction. In addition, all the results of
the above two graph-based studies rely to a greater extent on the graphs’ accuracy, real-time,
and simplicity. HRLHF [130] also points out that due to the complex and hidden dependencies
between microservices, there is a more significant challenge in accurately constructing causal
graphs in large-scale microservice systems in real-time from observed data [52, 59]. More
importantly, HRLHF [130] propose that the adoption of the “human-in-the-loop” training idea in
large language models such as ChatGPT [99] proposed has proven to be promising in designing
customized models and improving model performance. Therefore, it is promising to design and
trainarootcauselocalizationmodelwithlowdependenceongraphstructureusingalargemodel.
5.3 AI-Driven Indirect Analysis Methods
WesummarizetheprimaryusageandgeneratedeffectsofAIforrootcauselocalizationanddivide
the role played by AI into two parts: the optimization of graph representation and the modeling
of root cause analysis.
The optimization of graph representation focuses on the dependency relation redundancy and
highresourceconsumptioninconstructingdependencygraphs.AItechniques,suchasRL,canhelp
reduce resource consumption and enable fast and efficient learning of causal discovery strategies.
For example, HRLHF [130], based on the static topology of microservice systems, effectively uti-
lizesfeedbackfromhumanengineerstoreduceuncertaintyinthediscoveryofservicedependency
graphs. In addition, it uses an RL model to reduce the number of required queries from O(N2) to
O(1),constructingtheservicedependencygraphswithhighaccuracyandlowresourceconsump-
tion. The process is shown in Figure6. This method first collects the initial graphs of service
dependenciesandlearnstheunderlyingcausaldiscoverystrategiesthroughasupervisedlearning
model.Subsequently,HRLHF[ 130]efficientlycollectshumanfeedbackandtrainsarewardmodel.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:22 N. Fu et al.
Fig. 6. An instance of graph representation optimization using AI.
Fig. 7. An instance of root cause analysis modeling using the graph convolutional network.
Finally, it optimizes the causal discovery strategy through the reward model obtained from the
training and obtains more accurate and straightforward service dependency graphs. It provides
superior performance in various metrics compared with state-of-the-art methods. Therefore, us-
ing AI techniques to process, analyze, and correlate large-scale data generated by microservice
systems has substantial advantages.
Root cause analysis modeling refers to using AI techniques for root cause localization. Exist-
ing methods are mainly divided into supervised classification models and unsupervised inference
models. Unsupervised inference models mostly use the heuristic random walk algorithm to root
cause localization, such as MicroRCA [136] and MonitorRank [58]. The algorithms of these learn-
ingmodelsarerelativelylightweightanddonotrequirepre-preparedlabeleddataandpre-trained
models. Therefore, heuristic unsupervised inference models require lower resource and time con-
sumption and are more adaptable to network environments. However, these learning models lack
sufficient learning of historical fault information. In addition, some methods have shown that the
distribution of fault root causes satisfies the Eighty-Twenty rule. That is, the root causes of 80%
of faults are always of several fixed types. Therefore, some methods use supervised classification
models to achieve root cause localization. They aim at using historical fault features fully and an-
alyze historical fault patterns from multimodal data. More importantly, to provide operators with
adequate fault-related interpretable information, some studies still extend the granularity of fault
localizationfrommicroservicesoranomalousmetricstofaultscenarios.Forexample,Grace[ 110]
usesaspatial-temporalgraphconvolutionalnetworktobinaryclassifyeachmicroserviceanduses
the interpreter model to provide interpretable information about faults, as shown in Figure7.
However, by analyzing the attributes of the publicly available dataset provided by AIOPS2022,
we find that all the labeled data required by supervised classification methods need to be
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:23
pre-prepared by engineers. This process relies on specialized knowledge and expends many
workforce and material resources. Furthermore, a large amount of data in the above dataset
remains unlabeled, and there are variations in the amount of labeled data generated by different
faults, which may lead to an imbalance in the training data. More importantly, getting pure and
accurate labeled data in a complex microservice system is challenging. All of the above issues
significantly impact the quality of the training data, and low-quality labeled data may create
uncertainty in the performance of supervised classification methods. Therefore, we propose that
subsequentresearchfocusesonthegenerationandpreprocessingoflabeleddataifitistobebased
on supervised classification methods. On the other hand, future works can investigate fault local-
ization methods based on small amounts of labeled data and consider combining semi-supervised
or self-supervised learning modes to enhance the performance of classification learning.
Besides, the accuracy and efficiency are contradictory, and existing methods lack a tradeoff
of accuracy and efficiency. After the above analysis of the two models, supervised classification
models focus more on the accuracy of fault localization and tend to ignore the discussion of effi-
ciency. In contrast, unsupervised heuristic algorithms have a lower accuracy of fault localization
than classification models because of insufficient utilization of historical information. However,
these methods have high efficiency. Therefore, the subsequent methods need to deeply have a
tradeoffbetweenaccuracyandefficiency,makingthelocalizationmethodmorepracticalinactual
environments.
6 Performance Evaluation and Qualitative Comparison
Taking the analysis of the fault root cause localization in the microservice system in Section4
and Section5 as a reference, we hereafter summarize the surveyed techniques for identifying the
possiblefaultrootcausesunderthreedifferentperspectives,viz.,therootcauseanalysismethods’
attributecomparison(Section 6.1),localizationlevelandgranularitycomparison(Section 6.2)and
the effectiveness and efficiency evaluation (Section6.3).
6.1 Attribute Comparison of Root Cause Localization
To compare the differences in problem modeling and localization performance between existing
methods, this survey classifies the root cause inference methods. Besides, it analyzes the existing
methods in five aspects: interpretable, adaptive, scalable, practical, and multi-source, respectively.
As shown in Table9, the methods published in top conferences or journals are from 2018 to the
present.Thenewestmethodsarelocatedatthetopinchronologicalorder.Weclassify12methods
intotwocategoriesbasedonwhethertheyuseAI,andsevenmethodsuseAItechniquestoimprove
localization performance.
Interpretabilityindicatesamethodthatcaninterprettheoutput,provideactionablerecommen-
dations to network managers, and assist in the recovery of faults. Most existing fault localization
methods, such as Revelio [33], FluxRank [72], and Pham et al. [102], do not have explicit inter-
pretability. Some existing DL-based interpretation methods [12, 31] focus on understanding the
internal mechanisms of the model rather than the faults themselves. The seven methods possess
interpretability, e.g., Grace [110] provides the fault root causes, fault types, related anomaly met-
rics, and the dependencies based on the GNNExplainer structure.
Adaptability indicates a method can dynamically adjust and optimize its algorithm based on
datacharacteristicsandfeedbackinformation.Fivemethodspossessadaptability,morecommonly
found in heuristic unsupervised learning models. For example, DyCause [100] designs an adap-
tive threshold algorithm from the environment to realize the construction of service dependency
graphs based on dynamic causality curves.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:24 N. Fu et al.
Table 9. Comparison of Features among Different Fault Root Cause Localization Methods, Based on
Their Class (viz., Y for using AI Techniques, N for not using AI Techniques)
Methods Class Problem Modeling Interpretable1 Adaptive2 Scalable3 Practical4 Multi-Source5
TRACE DIA G [32] Y graphical causal model on
service dependency graphs ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓
HRLHF [130] Y graphical causal model on
service dependency graphs ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓
Murphy [48] Y MRF analysis on
relationship graphs ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓
Grace [110] Y supervised classification model on
service dependency graphs ✓ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗
DejaVu [65] Y supervised classification model on
failure dependency graphs ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
ServiceRank [79] N second-order random walk model on
impact graphs ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
DyCause [100] N anomaly propagation path analysis on
correlation graphs ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓
GROOT [128] N personalized random walk on
event causality graphs ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
MS-Rank [77,78] N heuristic random walk on
impact graphs ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✗
MEPFL [146] Y supervised classification model on
track records ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✓
Seer [41] Y probabilistic prediction model on
service dependency graphs ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
TON18 [133] N random walk on
anomaly propagation graphs ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
1Interpretable: The method has a high interpretation capability for faults, which helps engineers develop a fault
recovery strategy.
2Adaptive: The method has the ability to dynamically adjust algorithms based on data characteristics, feedback, or
context.
3Scalable: The method has excellent performance in different scale environments.
4Practical: The method has been applied in actual production environments.
5Multi-Source: The method has the ability to identify and locate the root cause of multiple faults.
✓denotes the presence of a feature and✗denotes its absence.
Scalability indicates that a method can perform excellently in different scales of environments,
andfivemethodshavescalability.Forexample,DejaVu[ 65]discussesscalabilitybyanalyzingthe
time consumption of model training and analyzes the training time for each epoch regarding the
number of metrics, failures, or failure instances.
Practicalityindicatesthatamethodhasbeenappliedin anactualproductionenvironment,and
seven methods have practicality. For example,TRACE DIA G [32] has been integrated as a critical
component in Microsoft Exchange systems. Future research can utilize the big model to design
lightweight and high-speed fault localization methods. Ultimately, the localization methods are
deployed as plug-ins, achieving mutual enhancement with the big model.
Multi-Sourceofamethodindicatesthatitcanidentifyandlocalizemultiplerootcausesoffaults,
andallsevenmethodsalreadyhavethiscapacity.Forexample,byconstructingamulti-prediction
model, MEPFL [146] achieves the classification of fault type and the number of fault root causes.
Although it has been shown that the probability of a complex situation with multiple root causes
of faults simultaneously is low [27], a certain percentage still exists.
Futuremethodscaninteractwithmicroservicesystemsformultiplesingle-ormulti-root-cause
faulttypes,finallyachievingseconds-levelfaultlocalization.Inaddition,duetotheextensiveuseof
cloud native techniques in production environments, fault localization research can incorporate
AI techniques to achieve fine-grained localization and provide actionable recommendations for
fault recovery.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:25
Fig. 8. Distribution of root cause localization levels in existing research.
6.2 Localization Level and Granularity Comparison
Existingfaultlocalizationmethodshavemainlytargetedmicroservice-levelfaults,e.g.,Grace[ 110],
RCD [52], and FacGraph [69]. In addition, in this survey, it is mentioned in Section3 that the
widespread use of cloud native technology, e.g., K8s, leads to the locations and types of faults
becoming diverse. Therefore, some methods for traditional architectures are no longer applicable.
For these reasons, this survey reclassifies the fault occurrence locations or localization levels.
We classify the localization level of microservice systems based on cloud-native architecture
into seven levels, as shown in Figure8. Higher-level components are vulnerable to lower-level
components. That is, the more fine-grained the localization level of a fault, the less impactful that
fault will be. In the seven levels, microservice-level faults have received extensive attention. For
example, MS-Rank [77, 78] uses an adaptive random walk algorithm to determine the microser-
vices that are the fault root causes in the impact graph. In the rectangular box of Figure8 are the
methods for service-level faults, including FRL-MFPG [22], RCD [52], and MicroCause [85]. Four
fault localization methods for cross-level are illustrated in Figure8. For example, Psqueeze [63]
focuses on Pod-level and microservice-level faults.
Cloud-native technologies, such as K8s, have led to increasingly complex relations between
upper-tier applications, intermediate components, and infrastructures, creating challenges for
cross-level correlation of faults and discovering fault impact propagation paths. Therefore, we
propose that subsequent research needs to correlate across-level faults end-to-end. Ultimately,
whenafaultoccurs,thelevelatwhichthefaultoccursandthecross-levelpropagationpathofthe
fault can be quickly and efficiently analyzed, which helps analyze the scope of fault impact and
provides recovery strategies. In addition, we propose to use the concept of fault scenarios on top
of the concepts of fault levels and fault types to provide operators with fault-related interpretable
information.
6.3 Effectiveness and Efficiency Evaluation
When applied to actual environments, localization methods face a conflict, i.e., Effectiveness and
Efficiency. We first introduce the two types of evaluation metrics. Then, we depict the necessity
oftime andresourceoverheadevaluation.Finally,we give thecomprehensiveperformanceevalu-
ations of existing top studies in this community.
6.3.1 Ranking and Classification Evaluation Metrics. Evaluationmetricsarecloselyrelatedtore-
search objectives and problems. This survey first summarizes six ranking evaluation metrics that
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:26 N. Fu et al.
have been widely used in this community. The top-k accuracy and average accuracy metrics are
widely used to evaluate the ranking results [85]. However, this metric does not consider all rec-
ommendedfaultunitsintheevaluationprocess.Theaverageaccuracymetric,denotedasAvg@k,
describestheoverallperformanceoftheaccuracyforthefaultlocalization.Besides,whenthedata
is not balanced or extreme data exists, the accuracy-related metrics cannot objectively evaluate
the algorithm. MonitorRank [58] proposes the top-k precision and average precision, which have
beenwidely usedin subsequentstudies. The top-k precisionmetric, denotedPR@k, describesthe
percentage of outcomes where the fault root cause is correctly predicted out of all outcomes pre-
dicted to be the fault root cause. The average precision, denoted as MAP, describes the overall
performance of the fault localization by computing the average of PR@k. The above four evalu-
ation metrics are mainly used to evaluate the performance of single fault root cause localization.
Somemethodsproposeanevaluationmetricformultiplefaultrootcauselocalization.Forexample,
DyCause [100] defines an evaluation method, denoted as RankScore.
Besides, some studies also use the classification evaluation metrics. For binary classification,
they mostly use the four common metrics: Accuracy, Precision, Recall (TPR), and FPR. Moreover,
some metrics that consider two above metrics comprehensively are proposed. For example, F1
combines Precision and Recall, and ROC combines FPR and Recall.
6.3.2 Time and Resource Overhead. Thebusinessdeliveryhashightimerequirementsforfault
root cause localization. Time overhead is an important issue affecting methods’ adaptability and
practicality. In traditional heuristic root cause localization, time overhead mainly refers to test-
ing time. For methods that require the construction of graphs, the time overhead required for the
graph construction needs to be considered. In addition, with the application of ML and DL, the
time overhead of these AI-driven methods mainly consists of training and testing time. More at-
tention is given to the testing time required from fault discovery to localization results output in
actual environments. Furthermore, root cause localization studies need to be integrated into mi-
croservicesystemstoimprovethequalityofapplicationdelivery.Theresourceoverheadrequired
for data collection and root cause analysis, such as CPU, memory, IO reads and writes, and disk
storage,shouldnotsignificantlyburdentheoriginalsystem.Therefore,toimprovetheapproach’s
scalability, the studies need to be evaluated from the resource overhead.
Table10 shows the evaluation of 17 top studies. We compare these studies in terms of learning
paradigms,applicationscenarios,effectiveness,andefficiency.Closed-worldevaluationmeansthat
themethodsconsideronlyknowntypesandfeaturesandassumethatthelabelsin theevaluation
datasetarecompleteandaccurate.Atthesametime,open-worldevaluationmeansthatthemeth-
odscandealwithunknownfaulttypesandunrecordedorunusedattributes.Forexample,DejaVu
[65] has been demonstrated to achieve similar performance on previously unseen faults as seen.
Moststudiescannotperformhighlyintheopenworld.Inaddition,Existingmethodshavefocused
more on improving the localization effectiveness rather than efficiency. Few studies focus on re-
source overhead, which is important for evaluating the impact of methods on original systems.
7 Challenges and Future Directions
Root cause analysis is essential for maintaining software and infrastructure systems. Its goal is
to quickly and accurately identify the causes of faults to minimize downtime and improve avail-
ability and reliability. Traditional rule-based methods struggle to meet the demands of modern,
complex environments such as cloud and edge computing. Consequently, AI-driven approaches
are becoming mainstream, offering greater intelligence, automation, and efficiency.
AI-driven methods not only enhance fault localization by reducing manual effort, time,
and errors but also provide repair suggestions, predict potential issues, and support proactive
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:27
Table 10. Effectiveness and Efficiency Evaluation for Root Cause Localization in Microservice Systems,
Based on Their Class (viz., Y for using AI Techniques, N for not using AI Techniques)
Learning
Paradigm Methods Class Closed
World
Open
World
Effec-
tiveness
Time
Overhead
Resource
Overhead
Unsupervised
Learning
TraceAnomaly [73] Y ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Psqueeze [63] N ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Murphy [48] Y ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
ServiceRank [79] N ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
DyCause [100] N ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
GROOT [128] N ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
MS-Rank [77, 78] N ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
TON18 [133] N ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
Microscope [67] N ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓
Reinforcement
Learning
TRACE DIA G [32] Y ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
HRLHF [130] Y ✓ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗
Supervised
Learning
MEPFL [146] Y ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
Seer [41] Y ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✓
CloudRCA [143] Y ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
Grace [110] Y ✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ ✗
DejaVu [65] Y ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✗
✓denotes the presence of a evaluation and✗denotes its absence.
maintenance. By leveraging historical data, AI-driven RCA identifies system bottlenecks, im-
proves fault tolerance and resilience, and optimizes resource usage by identifying waste and
bottlenecks. Moreover, it offers development and operations teams a unified, transparent view of
system health, fostering better collaboration and improving overall operational efficiency.
The Microservices systems rely on modern infrastructures for stable operation. Although AI-
drivenanalysismethodsshowgreatpotentialinsoftwareandinfrastructuremaintenance,effective
root cause localization in microservice systems still faces challenges indata collection, feature
correlation, high-performance model construction,a n dapplication scenario expansion.
At the same time, these challenges present unprecedented opportunities for innovative research
in future work.
7.1 Data Collection and Analysis
Effective root cause localization in microservice systems relies on high-quality, fine-grained ob-
servability data. However, existing data collection and analysis approaches face several critical
challenges.
First, a mismatch exists between benchmark and production fault data, which limits the appli-
cabilityofmanycurrenttechniques.PublicbenchmarkdatasetsoftenfocusonfaultssuchasCPU
or memory exhaustion, packet loss, or latency anomalies. However, these fault types do not fully
capture the complexity of real-world failures in production environments, which are often more
subtle, multi-layered, or service-composite. In modern cloud-native architectures, fault localiza-
tionatthemicroserviceorhostlevelisoftentoocoarse-grainedtosupportpreciseandactionable
diagnosis. Real-world failure scenarios frequently require finer-grained system modeling across
multiple components and deployment layers to identify the root cause accurately.
Second, current data collection methods lack adaptability and cannot keep pace with frequent
changesinmicroservicesystems.Mostagent-basedsolutionsoperatewithstaticconfigurations,re-
sultinginredundantdatacollectionandlimitedresponsivenesstosystemdynamics.Microservice
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:28 N. Fu et al.
systems are inherently dynamic, with continuous updates in service topology, deployment, and
workload characteristics. Without adaptation, data collection strategies become outdated, result-
ingindatadriftandreduceddiagnosticrelevance.Therefore,thereisapressingneedforintelligent,
self-adaptive data collection mechanisms that can adjust granularity, scope, and frequency based
on observed system behavior or anomaly signals. Techniques such as reinforcement learning
or feedback-driven control policies may enable more efficient and context-aware collection
strategies.
Third,theheterogeneityandfragmentationofobservabilitydataacrosssystemlayersposechal-
lenges for effective analysis. Metrics, traces, and logs are often collected independently, lacking
unified formats or semantic consistency. This fragmentation hampers cross-layer correlation and
preventsholisticreasoningaboutsystembehavior.Toaddressthis,standardizeddatapatternsand
unified representations are needed to integrate diverse observability signals.
7.2 Feature Correlation
Feature correlation is essential for accurate root cause localization. However, existing approaches
still face two challenges.
First, existing studies are limited in their ability to extract valuable features for fault analysis
from large-scale data. Since different fault types exhibit distinct behaviors, the relevance and dis-
criminative power of features vary accordingly. However, few studies explicitly analyze the cor-
relation between specific fault types and their associated features. To address this, future work
should quantify the contribution of individual features to localization performance across fault
categories, enabling the identification of fault-type-specific feature sets for more targeted and in-
terpretable diagnosis. Given the temporal nature of observability data, models such as LSTM and
Transformer are promising for capturing contextual dependencies and encoding rich temporal-
spatial information.
Second, graph-based methods are effective for modeling interactions among microservices, in-
stances, or components, but their scalability remains a significant concern. As the number of ser-
vicesgrows,thecostofgraphconstructionandfeatureextractionincreasessharplyincomputation
andmemory.Inlarge-scalesystemswithhundredsorthousandsofmicroservices,graphsoftenbe-
comehigh-dimensional,denselyconnected,anddynamicallychanging,limitingtheefficiencyand
adaptabilityofexistingtechniques.Toaddressthis,futureworkshouldexplorelightweight,hierar-
chical,ordynamicgraphrepresentations,aswellashybridmodelsthatcombinegraph-basedand
temporal or attention-based features. Adaptive feature selection and graph pruning can further
enhance scalability while preserving interpretability.
7.3 High-Performance Model Construction
Model construction is crucial for achieving root cause localization. However, existing approaches
face two challenges.
First,mostexistingmethodsutilizemulti-sourceobservabilitydata–metrics,logs,andtraces–to
enhance model input. While this integration increases the coverage of system behavior, current
researchlargelyignorestheeffectsamongthesedatasources.Thatmeansfeaturesfromonemodal-
ity may override or obscure important signals from another, leading to suboptimal or misleading
modelbehavior.Futureworkshouldinvestigatemodality-levelfeaturedisentanglementandalign-
mentstrategiestoensurethatthefusionofmultipledatasourcesleadstoperformancegainsrather
than feature interference.
Second,manyexistingstudiesrelyongraph-basedworkflowstoimproveperformancebymod-
elinginteractionsinmicroservices,instances,orcomponents.Whileeffective,thesemethodsoften
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:29
incur significant computational and memory overhead. Some approaches further encode graphs
into sequences using LSTM models to capture contextual dependencies, which introduce addi-
tional costs and lead to information loss. Such multi-stage pipelines limit their applicability in
production environments requiring real-time or low-latency diagnosis. Despite the focus on ac-
curacy, the tradeoff between effectiveness and efficiency is often overlooked. Future work should
explicitly assess whether the performance gains of graph-based models justify their resource de-
mands, particularly in large-scale systems.
7.4 Application Scenario Expansion
Existing studies primarily focus on centralized cloud environments and the microservice systems
they host. As cloud computing has evolved, three traditional service models have emerged:In-
frastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS),a n dSoftware as a Service
(SaaS).Thewidespreadadoptionofcloud-nativetechnologieshasintroducedvariantsofthePaaS
model–Container as a Service (CaaS)and Function as a Service (FaaS)–which enhance en-
terprises’ self-service capabilities in the cloud. However, these new computing environments also
pose significant challenges for root cause analysis and localization.
In the CaaS, PaaS, and FaaS models, the abstraction level of services gradually increases, reduc-
ing the operations team’s control and visibility over the underlying infrastructures. This problem
maymakeitdifficulttoobtainvaluabledataintimetoassessthesystem’sstatus.Inparticular,the
FaaSenvironmenthasshort-livedandhighlydynamicfunctions,whichleadtosignificantchanges
in the number and location of service instances. These changes may increase the complexity of
managing dependencies between services and complicate the reasoning of fault propagation pat-
terns, presenting challenges for root cause analysis. Future work should adapt to this dynamic
environment to capture data and model the complex changes in service dependencies, enabling
accuraterootcauselocalization.Inaddition,CaaS,PaaS,andFaaStypicallyoperateinmulti-tenant
environments, where shared resources can lead to interdependent faults. Therefore, future work
mayalsoneedtoconsiderisolationinmulti-tenantsettingstopreventmisattributingonetenant’s
faults to another.
Theriseofotherdistributedcloudmodels,suchasedgecomputing,bringsmicroservicescloser
toendusers,improvingserviceresponsiveness.However,edgeserviceshavelimitedcomputingre-
sources and need to collaborate with cloud centers through cloud-edge cooperation technologies
for service interaction. Compared with centralized cloud environments, distributed cloud-edge
collaboration scenarios present new challenges for root cause analysis and localization. First, the
complexityofcloudandedgenetworktopologiesandthedistributednatureofmicroserviceslead
to an increasing and dynamic number of potential faults in infrastructure, instances, or services.
Failures can occur in the cloud, at edge nodes, or across various communication paths between
them. Future root cause analysis methods need to adapt to this decentralized and dynamic net-
workenvironment,enablingreal-timemonitoringanddiagnosisoffaultsacrossmultipleservices.
Then, significant differences in observable data features exist between cloud services and edge
services. Future work should analyze the feature distributions of cloud networks, edge networks,
and cross-network segments, considering the complexities of communication between edge and
cloudservices.Itcanhelpaccuratelydistinguishbetweencommunicationnoisecausedbynetwork
instability and actual fault delays.
Next, edge services also face challenges due to limited network bandwidth and computing
resources, making data collection and analysis for root cause localization more difficult. Future
work should adopt lightweight methods and utilize AI techniques to extract fault patterns
from massive amounts of metrics, traces, and logs, thereby reducing feature redundancy and
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:30 N. Fu et al.
Fig. 9. An end-to-end fault scenario analysis framework in enterprise networks.
enablinglow-overhead,practicalRCA.Moreover,existingstudiesprimarilyfocusonfaultswithin
infrastructure and microservices. However, real-world applications operate in open network
environments and interact continuously with end users. Limiting RCA to isolated microservice
systems overlooks issues that occur along the full end-to-end path. When a fault arises, it is
crucialtofirstdelimititsorigin–whetherfromthecloudapplication,theclient,oranintermediate
InternetServiceProvider(ISP) .Ifattributedtothecloud,finer-grainedlocalizationcanthenbe
applied.ExpandingRCAfromclosedmicroservicecontextstoopenInternetscenariosisessential
for improving the quality and adaptability of cloud services.
To illustrate this, we present an end-to-end analysis framework with a new perspective using
an enterprise network as an example, as shown in Figure9. This framework extends root cause
analysistoopeninternetscenarios,introducingnewrequirementsfordatacollection,analysis,and
faultlocalization.Itutilizesthreedifferentagentsfordatacollection:theuseragent,networkagent,
and cloud agent. These agents can adjust their measurement strategies based on network condi-
tions and available resources. Subsequently, based on the collected data, the framework achieves
the tradeoff between the effectiveness and efficiency of root cause localization through feature
correlation and encoding.
8 Conclusions
This article surveys significant studies in root cause localization in microservice systems. Before
discussing specific studies, we summarize a general workflow that includes data collection, root
cause analysis, and performance evaluation.
Wehighlightdatacollectionmethodsinbenchmarkandproductionsystemsandprovidedataset
constructionsuggestionsbycomparingdatatypes,levels,andattributes.Furthermore,wepropose
aclassificationintodirectandindirectrootcauseanalysismethods,dependingonwhethergraph-
based modeling is involved, and emphasize the role and limitations of AI for relationship charac-
terization and fault localization in these analysis methods. Finally, we discuss key challenges and
future directions to inspire innovative research.
In conclusion, root cause localization is crucial for maintaining cloud-based services. With the
growingadoptionofmicroservicearchitecturesandcloud-nativetechnologies,rootcauselocaliza-
tion remains a vibrant research direction.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:31
References
[1] CloudNativeComputingFoundation. 2020.CNCFCloudNativeInteractiveLandscape.CNCFCloudNativeInterac-
tive Landscape. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://landscape.cncf.io/
[2] Cloud Native Computing Foundation. 2022. What is continuous profiling? CNCF. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps:
//www.cncf.io/blog/2022/05/31/what-is-continuous-profiling/
[3] Nightingale. 2024. Nightingale. Nightingale. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://n9e.github.io/
[4] Netflix. 2022. GitHub - Netflix/mantis: A platform that makes it easy for developers to build realtime, cost-effective,
operations-focused applications. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://github.com/netflix/mantis
[5] Pooja Aggarwal, Ajay Gupta, Prateeti Mohapatra, Seema Nagar, Atri Mandal, Qing Wang, and Amit Paradkar. 2020.
Localization of operational faults in cloud applications by mining causal dependencies in logs using golden signals.
InInternational Conference on Service-Oriented Computing. Springer, 137–149.
[6] FarazAhmed,JeffreyErman,ZihuiGe,AlexXLiu,JiaWang,andHeYan.2017.Detectingandlocalizingend-to-end
performancedegradationforcellulardataservicesbasedontcplossratioandroundtriptime. IEEE/ACMTransactions
on Networking25, 6 (2017), 3709–3722.
[7] Vijay Arya, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, Pooja Aggarwal, Qing Wang, Prateeti Mohapatra, and Seema Nagar. 2021.
Evaluation of causal inference techniques for AIOps. InProceedings of the 3rd ACM India Joint International Confer-
ence on Data Science & Management of Data (8th ACM IKDD CODS & 26th COMAD). 188–192.
[8] Sachin Ashok, Vipul Harsh, Brighten Godfrey, Radhika Mittal, Srinivasan Parthasarathy, and Larisa Shwartz. 2024.
TraceWeaver: Distributed request tracing for microservices without application modification. InProceedings of the
ACM SIGCOMM 2024 Conference. 828–842.
[9] JayAyres,JasonFlannick,JohannesGehrke,andTomiYiu.2002.Sequentialpatternminingusingabitmaprepresen-
tation. InProceedings of the Eighth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
429–435.
[10] Azamikram.2022.GitHub-azamikram/rcd:RootCauseDiscovery:RootCauseAnalysisofFailuresinMicroservices
through Causal Discovery. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://github.com/azamikram/rcd
[11] Paramvir Bahl, Ranveer Chandra, Albert Greenberg, Srikanth Kandula, David A. Maltz, and Ming Zhang. 2007. To-
wards highly reliable enterprise network services via inference of multi-level dependencies.ACM SIGCOMM Com-
puter Communication Review37, 4 (2007), 13–24.
[12] David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. 2017. Network dissection: Quantifying
interpretability of deep visual representations. InProceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 6541–6549.
[13] Netflix Technology Blog. 2020. Building Netflix’s Distributed Tracing Infrastructure. Retrieved from https://
netflixtechblog.com/building-netflixs-distributed-tracing-infrastructure-bb856c319304 . Accessed Apr. 4, 2025.
[14] ÁlvaroBrandón,MarcSolé,AlbertoHuélamo,DavidSolans,MaríaSPérez,andVictorMuntés-Mulero.2020.Graph-
based root cause analysis for service-oriented and microservice architectures.Journal of Systems and Software159
(2020), 110432.
[15] Kailash Budhathoki, Dominik Janzing, Patrick Bloebaum, and Hoiyi Ng. 2021. Why did the distribution change?. In
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 1666–1674.
[16] Yang Cai, Biao Han, Jie Li, Na Zhao, and Jinshu Su. 2021. Modelcoder: A fault model based automatic root cause
localization framework for microservice systems. In2021 IEEE/ACM 29th International Symposium on Quality of
Service (IWQOS’21). IEEE, 1–6.
[17] Chaos-mesh. 2025. GitHub - chaos-mesh/chaos-mesh: A Chaos Engineering Platform for Kubernetes. GitHub. Re-
trieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://github.com/chaos-mesh/chaos-mesh
[18] Hao Chen, Kegang Wei, An Li, Tao Wang, and Wenbo Zhang. 2021. Trace-based intelligent fault diagnosis for mi-
croservices with deep learning. In2021 IEEE 45th Annual Computers, Software, and Applications Conference (COMP-
SAC’21). IEEE, 884–893.
[19] PengfeiChen,YongQi,andDiHou.2016.CauseInfer:Automatedend-to-endperformancediagnosiswithhierarchi-
cal causality graph in cloud environment.IEEE Transactions on Services Computing12, 2 (2016), 214–230.
[20] Pengfei Chen, Yong Qi, Pengfei Zheng, and Di Hou. 2014. Causeinfer: Automatic and distributed performance di-
agnosis with hierarchical causality graph in large distributed systems. InIEEE INFOCOM 2014-IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications. IEEE, 1887–1895.
[21] YuHua Chen, NingJiang Chen, WenXiu Xu, LinMing Lian, and Huan Tu. 2021. MFRL-CA: Microservice fault root
cause location based on correlation analysis. In2021 8th International Conference on Dependable Systems and Their
Applications (DSA’21). IEEE, 90–101.
[22] YuhuaChen,DongqiXu,NingjiangChen,andXuWu.2023.FRL-MFPG:Propagation-awarefaultrootcauselocation
for microservice intelligent operation and maintenance.Information and Software Technology153 (2023), 107083.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:32 N. Fu et al.
[23] ZhuangbinChen,YuKang,LiqunLi,XuZhang,HongyuZhang,HuiXu,YangfanZhou,LiYang,JeffreySun,Zhang-
wei Xu, Yingnong Dang, Feng Gao, Pu Zhao, Bo Qiao, Qingwei Lin, Dongmei Zhang, and Michael R. Lyu. 2020.
Towardsintelligentincidentmanagement:Whyweneeditandhowwemakeit.In Proceedingsofthe28thACMJoint
Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering.
1487–1497.
[24] Zhuangbin Chen, Jinyang Liu, Yuxin Su, Hongyu Zhang, Xiao Ling, Yongqiang Yang, and Michael R Lyu. 2022.
Adaptiveperformanceanomalydetectionforonlineservicesystemsviapatternsketching.In Proceedingsofthe44th
International Conference on Software Engineering. 61–72.
[25] cncf. 2022. tag-observability/whitepaper.md at main · cncf/tag-observability. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from
https://github.com/cncf/tag-observability/blob/main/whitepaper.md
[26] Colin Ian King. 2023. stress-ng (stress next generation). GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://github.com/
ColinIanKing/stress-ng
[27] WikipediaContributors.2019.Occam’srazor.Wikipedia.RetrievedJune4,2025from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Occam%27s_razor
[28] Coralogix. 2024. Observability: Principles, Challenges, Capabilities & Practices—Coralogix. Retrieved fromhttps:
//coralogix.com/guides/observability/. Accessed Apr. 4, 2025.
[29] Divyaansh Dandona, Mevlut Demir, and John J Prevost. 2020. Graph based root cause analysis in cloud data center.
In 2020 IEEE 15th International Conference of System of Systems Engineering (SoSE’20). IEEE, 549–554.
[30] Yingnong Dang, Qingwei Lin, and Peng Huang. 2019. Aiops: Real-world challenges and research innovations. In
2019 IEEE/ACM 41st International Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion’19).
IEEE, 4–5.
[31] VincenzoDiCicco,DonatellaFirmani,NickKoudas,PaoloMerialdo,andDiveshSrivastava.2019.Interpretingdeep
learning models for entity resolution: An experience report using LIME. InProceedings of the Second International
Workshop on Exploiting Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Data Management.1 – 4 .
[32] Ruomeng Ding, Chaoyun Zhang, Lu Wang, Yong Xu, Minghua Ma, Xiaomin Wu, Meng Zhang, Qingjun Chen, Xin
Gao, Xuedong Gao, Hao Fan, Saravan Rajmohan, Qingwei Lin, and Dongmei Zhang. 2023. TraceDiag: Adaptive,
interpretable, and efficient root cause analysis on large-scale microservice systems. InProceedings of the 31st ACM
Joint European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 1762–
1773.
[33] PradeepDogga,KarthikNarasimhan,AnirudhSivaraman,ShivSaini,GeorgeVarghese,andRaviNetravali.2022.Rev-
elio:Ml-generateddebuggingqueriesforfindingrootcausesindistributedsystems. ProceedingsofMachineLearning
and Systems4 (2022), 601–622.
[34] MinDu,FeifeiLi,GuinengZheng,andVivekSrikumar.2017.Deeplog:Anomalydetectionanddiagnosisfromsystem
logs through deep learning. InProceedings of the 2017 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications
Security. 1285–1298.
[35] eBPF.2025.eBPF-Introduction,Tutorials&CommunityResources.ebpf.io.RetrievedJune4,2025from https://ebpf.
io
[36] Elasticsearch B.V. 2025. Logstash: Collect, Parse, Transform Logs. Elastic. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://www.
elastic.co/logstash
[37] The Apache Software Foundation. 2025. Apache SkyWalking. skywalking.apache.org. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from
https://skywalking.apache.org/
[38] FudanSELab.2019.GitHub-FudanSELab/Research-ESEC-FSE2019-AIOPS.GitHub.RetrievedJune4,2025from https:
//github.com/FudanSELab/Research-ESEC-FSE2019-AIOPS
[39] FudanSELab. 2022. GitHub - FudanSELab/train-ticket: Train Ticket - A Benchmark Microservice System. GitHub.
Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://github.com/FudanSELab/train-ticket
[40] Yu Gan, Yanqi Zhang, Dailun Cheng, Ankitha Shetty, Priyal Rathi, Nayan Katarki, Ariana Bruno, Justin Hu, Brian
Ritchken, Brendon Jackson, KelvinHu, Meghna Pancholi, Yuan He, BrettClancy,Chris Colen,Fukang Wen,Cather-
ine Leung, Siyuan Wang, Leon Zaruvinsky, Mateo Espinosa, Rick Lin, Zhongling Liu, Jake Padilla, and Christina
Delimitrou. 2019. An open-source benchmark suite for microservices and their hardware-software implications for
cloud & edge systems. InProceedings of the Twenty-Fourth International Conference on Architectural Support for Pro-
gramming Languages and Operating Systems. 3–18.
[41] Yu Gan, Yanqi Zhang, Kelvin Hu, Dailun Cheng, Yuan He, Meghna Pancholi, and Christina Delimitrou. 2019. Seer:
Leveraging big data to navigate the complexity of performance debugging in cloud microservices. InProceedings of
the24thInternationalConferenceonArchitectural SupportforProgramming Languages andOperatingSystems .19–33.
[42] Google. 2024. cadvisor. GitHub, Retrieved fromhttps://github.com/google/cadvisor. Accessed Apr. 16, 2024.
[43] Jiazhen Gu, Chuan Luo, Si Qin, Bo Qiao, Qingwei Lin, Hongyu Zhang, Ze Li, Yingnong Dang, Shaowei Cai,
Wei Wu, Yangfan Zhou, Murali Chintalapati, and Dongmei Zhang. 2020. Efficient incident identification from
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:33
multi-dimensional issue reports via meta-heuristic search. InProceedings of the 28th ACM Joint Meeting on Euro-
pean Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 292–303.
[44] ZijieGuan,JinjinLin,andPengfeiChen.2019.Onanomalydetectionandrootcauseanalysisofmicroservicesystems.
InService-OrientedComputing–ICSOC2018Workshops:ADMS,ASOCA,ISYyCC,CloTS,DDBS,andNLS4IoT,Hangzhou,
China, November 12–15, 2018, Revised Selected Papers 16. Springer, 465–469.
[45] Ruocheng Guo, Lu Cheng, Jundong Li, P Richard Hahn, and Huan Liu. 2020. A survey of learning causality with
data: Problems and methods.ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)53, 4 (2020), 1–37.
[46] XiaofengGuo,XinPeng,HanzhangWang,WanxueLi,HuaiJiang,DanDing,TaoXie,andLiangfeiSu.2020.Graph-
based trace analysis for microservice architecture understanding and problem diagnosis. InProceedings of the 28th
ACM Joint Meeting on European Software Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software
Engineering. 1387–1397.
[47] Vipul Harsh, Tong Meng, Kapil Agrawal, and Philip Brighten Godfrey. 2023. Flock: Accurate network fault localiza-
tion at scale.Proceedings of the ACM on Networking1, CoNEXT1 (2023), 1–22.
[48] VipulHarsh,WenxuanZhou,SachinAshok,RadhikaNiranjanMysore,BrightenGodfrey,andSujataBanerjee.2023.
Murphy:Performancediagnosisofdistributedcloudapplications.In ProceedingsoftheACMSIGCOMM2023Confer-
ence. 438–451.
[49] Dotan Horovits. 2022. Continuous Profiling: A New Observability Signal. Retrieved from https://logz.io/blog/
continuous-profiling-new-observability-signal-in-opentelemetry/ . Accessed Apr. 4, 2025.
[50] Peng Huang, Chuanxiong Guo, Lidong Zhou, Jacob R Lorch, Yingnong Dang, Murali Chintalapati, and Randolph
Yao. 2017. Gray failure: The achilles’ heel of cloud-scale systems. InProceedings of the 16th Workshop on Hot Topics
in Operating Systems. 150–155.
[51] Bert Hubert. 2023. tc(8) - Linux Man Page. die.net, Retrieved fromhttps://linux.die.net/man/8/tc. Accessed Apr. 15,
2024.
[52] AzamIkram,SarthakChakraborty,SubrataMitra,ShivSaini,SaurabhBagchi,andMuratKocaoglu.2022.Rootcause
analysisoffailuresinmicroservicesthroughcausaldiscovery. AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems 35
(2022), 31158–31170.
[53] The Istio Authors. 2025. Istio. Istio. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://istio.io/
[54] The Jaeger Authors. 2025.Jaeger: open source, distributed tracing platform.www.jaegertracing.io.RetrievedJune 4,
2025 fromhttps://www.jaegertracing.io
[55] GlenJehandJenniferWidom.2003.Scalingpersonalizedwebsearch.In Proceedingsofthe12thInternationalConfer-
ence on World Wide Web. 271–279.
[56] Srikanth Kandula, Dina Katabi, and Jean-Philippe Vasseur. 2005. Shrink: A tool for failure diagnosis in IP networks.
InProceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Mining Network Data. 173–178.
[57] Srikanth Kandula, Ratul Mahajan, Patrick Verkaik, Sharad Agarwal, Jitendra Padhye, and Paramvir Bahl. 2009. De-
taileddiagnosisinenterprisenetworks.In ProceedingsoftheACMSIGCOMM2009ConferenceonDataCommunication .
243–254.
[58] Myunghwan Kim, Roshan Sumbaly, and Sam Shah. 2013. Root cause detection in a service-oriented architecture.
ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review41, 1 (2013), 93–104.
[59] Murat Kocaoglu, Amin Jaber, Karthikeyan Shanmugam, and Elias Bareinboim. 2019. Characterization and learning
of causal graphs with latentvariables from soft interventions.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems32
(2019).
[60] GrafanaLabs.2019.Grafana-Theopenplatformforanalyticsandmonitoring.GrafanaLabs.RetrievedJune4,2025
fromhttps://grafana.com/
[61] BowenLi,XinPeng,QilinXiang,HanzhangWang,TaoXie,JunSun,andXuanzheLiu.2022.Enjoyyourobservability:
An industrial survey of microservice tracing and analysis.Empirical Software Engineering27 (2022), 1–28.
[62] MingjieLi,ZeyanLi,KanglinYin,XiaohuiNie,WenchiZhang,KaixinSui,andDanPei.2022.Causalinference-based
rootcauseanalysisforonlineservicesystemswithinterventionrecognition.In Proceedingsofthe28thACMSIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 3230–3240.
[63] Zeyan Li, Junjie Chen, Yihao Chen, Chengyang Luo, Yiwei Zhao, Yongqian Sun, Kaixin Sui, Xiping Wang, Dapeng
Liu, Xing Jin, Qi Wang, and Dan Pei. 2023. Generic and robust root cause localization for multi-dimensional data in
online service systems.Journal of Systems and Software203 (2023), 111748.
[64] Zeyan Li, Junjie Chen, Rui Jiao, Nengwen Zhao, Zhijun Wang, Shuwei Zhang, Yanjun Wu, Long Jiang, Leiqin Yan,
Zikai Wang, Zhekang Chen, Wenchi Zhang, Xiaohui Nie, Kaixin Sui, and Dan Pei. 2021. Practical root cause local-
ization for microservice systems via trace analysis. In2021 IEEE/ACM 29th International Symposium on Quality of
Service (IWQOS’21). IEEE, 1–10.
[65] Zeyan Li, Nengwen Zhao, Mingjie Li, Xianglin Lu, Lixin Wang, Dongdong Chang, Xiaohui Nie, Li Cao, Wenchi
Zhang, Kaixin Sui, Yanhua Wang, Xu Du, Guoqiang Duan, and Dan Pei. 2022. Actionable and interpretable fault
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:34 N. Fu et al.
localization for recurring failures in online service systems. InProceedings of the 30th ACM Joint European Software
Engineering Conference and Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. 996–1008.
[66] Fred Lin, Keyur Muzumdar, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Mihai-Valentin Curelea, Seunghak Lee, and Sriram Sankar.
2020. Fast dimensional analysis for root cause investigation in a large-scale service environment.Proceedings of the
ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems4, 2 (2020), 1–23.
[67] JinJin Lin, Pengfei Chen, and Zibin Zheng. 2018. Microscope: Pinpoint performance issues with causal graphs in
micro-service environments. InService-Oriented Computing: 16th International Conference, ICSOC 2018, Hangzhou,
China, November 12–15, 2018, Proceedings 16. Springer, 3–20.
[68] Qingwei Lin, Hongyu Zhang, Jian-Guang Lou, Yu Zhang, and Xuewei Chen. 2016. Log clustering based problem
identification for online service systems. InProceedings of the 38th International Conference on Software Engineering
Companion. 102–111.
[69] Weilan Lin, Meng Ma, Disheng Pan, and Ping Wang. 2018. Facgraph: Frequent anomaly correlation graph mining
for root cause diagnose in micro-service architecture. In2018 IEEE 37th International Performance Computing and
Communications Conference (IPCCC’18). IEEE, 1–8.
[70] Dewei Liu, Chuan He, Xin Peng, Fan Lin, Chenxi Zhang, Shengfang Gong, Ziang Li, Jiayu Ou, and Zheshun Wu.
2021. Microhecl: High-efficient root cause localization in large-scale microservice systems. In2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd
International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice (ICSE-SEIP’21). IEEE, 338–347.
[71] Dapeng Liu, Youjian Zhao, Haowen Xu, Yongqian Sun, Dan Pei, Jiao Luo, Xiaowei Jing, and Mei Feng. 2015. Op-
prentice: Towards practical and automatic anomaly detection through machine learning. InProceedings of the 2015
Internet Measurement Conference. 211–224.
[72] Ping Liu, Yu Chen, Xiaohui Nie, Jing Zhu, Shenglin Zhang, Kaixin Sui, Ming Zhang, and Dan Pei. 2019. Fluxrank: A
widely-deployableframeworktoautomaticallylocalizingrootcausemachinesforsoftwareservicefailuremitigation.
In 2019 IEEE 30th International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE’19). IEEE, 35–46.
[73] Ping Liu, Haowen Xu, Qianyu Ouyang, Rui Jiao, Zhekang Chen, Shenglin Zhang, Jiahai Yang, Linlin Mo, Jice Zeng,
WenmanXue,andDanPei.2020.Unsuperviseddetectionofmicroservicetraceanomaliesthroughservice-leveldeep
bayesian networks. In2020 IEEE 31st International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering (ISSRE’20). IEEE,
48–58.
[74] Zhicheng Liu, Bongshin Lee, Srikanth Kandula, and Ratul Mahajan. 2010. Netclinic: Interactive visualization to en-
hance automated fault diagnosis in enterprise networks. In2010 IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and
Technology. IEEE, 131–138.
[75] Chengzhi Lu, Kejiang Ye, Wenyan Chen, and Cheng-Zhong Xu. 2019. ADGS: Anomaly detection and localization
based on graph similarity in container-based clouds. In2019 IEEE 25th International Conference on Parallel and Dis-
tributed Systems (ICPADS’19). IEEE, 53–60.
[76] ShutianLuo,HuanleXu,ChengzhiLu,KejiangYe,GuoyaoXu,LipingZhang,YuDing,JianHe,andChengzhongXu.
2021. Characterizing microservice dependency and performance: Alibaba trace analysis. InProceedings of the ACM
Symposium on Cloud Computing. 412–426.
[77] Meng Ma, Weilan Lin, Disheng Pan, and Ping Wang. 2019. Ms-rank: Multi-metric and self-adaptive root cause diag-
nosis for microservice applications. In2019 IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS’19). IEEE, 60–67.
[78] MengMa,WeilanLin,DishengPan,andPingWang.2020.Self-adaptiverootcausediagnosisforlarge-scalemicroser-
vice architecture.IEEE Transactions on Services Computing15, 3 (2020), 1399–1410.
[79] MengMa,WeilanLin,DishengPan,andPingWang.2021.Servicerank:Rootcauseidentificationofanomalyinlarge-
scale microservice architectures.IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing19, 5 (2021), 3087–3100.
[80] Meng Ma, Jingmin Xu, Yuan Wang, Pengfei Chen, Zonghua Zhang, and Ping Wang. 2020. Automap: Diagnose your
microservice-based web applications automatically. InProceedings of the Web Conference 2020. 246–258.
[81] Charity Majors, Liz Fong-Jones, and George Miranda. 2022.Observability Engineering. “O’Reilly Media, Inc.”.
[82] Leonardo Mariani, Cristina Monni, Mauro Pezzé, Oliviero Riganelli, and Rui Xin. 2018. Localizing faults in cloud
systems. In2018 IEEE 11th International Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation (ICST’18). IEEE,
262–273.
[83] Leonardo Mariani, Mauro Pezzè, Oliviero Riganelli, and Rui Xin. 2020. Predicting failures in multi-tier distributed
systems. Journal of Systems and Software161 (2020), 110464.
[84] Dhanya R. Mathews, Mudit Verma, J. Lakshmi, and Pooja Aggarwal. 2022. Towards more effective and explainable
faultmanagementusingcross-layerservicetopology.In 2022IEEE15thInternationalConferenceonCloudComputing
(CLOUD’22). IEEE, 94–96.
[85] YuanMeng,ShenglinZhang,YongqianSun,RuruZhang,ZhilongHu,YiyinZhang,ChenyangJia,ZhaogangWang,
and Dan Pei. 2020. Localizing failure root causes in a microservice through causality inference. In2020 IEEE/ACM
28th International Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS’20). IEEE, 1–10.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:35
[86] Haibo Mi, Huaimin Wang, Yangfan Zhou, Michael Rung-Tsong Lyu, and Hua Cai. 2013. Toward fine-grained, unsu-
pervised,scalableperformancediagnosisforproductioncloudcomputingsystems. IEEETransactionsonParalleland
Distributed Systems24, 6 (2013), 1245–1255.
[87] Microservices Demo Authors. 2021. microservices-demo/microservices-demo. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from
https://github.com/microservices-demo/microservices-demo
[88] S.R.Narayanaa,R.S.Lekshmi,andM.Sivaranjan.2022.Faultlocalizationincloudusingcentralitymeasures.In 2022
IEEE 29th Annual Software Technology Conference (STC’22). IEEE, 181–189.
[89] Netflix. 2024. GitHub - Netflix/atlas: In-memory dimensional time series database. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025
fromhttps://github.com/Netflix/atlas
[90] Netflix. 2025. GitHub - Netflix/spectator: Client library for collecting metrics. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from
https://github.com/Netflix/spectator
[91] Spring Cloud Netflix. 2025. 10. Metrics: Spectator, Servo, and Atlas. Spring.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps:
//cloud.spring.io/spring-cloud-netflix/multi/multi_netflix-metrics.html
[92] NetManAIOps. 2022. GitHub - NetManAIOps/DejaVu: Code and datasets for FSE.22 paper “Actionable and Inter-
pretable Fault Localization for Recurring Failures in Online Service Systems.” GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 from
https://github.com/NetManAIOps/DejaVu
[93] NetManAIOps. 2022. GitHub - NetManAIOps/PSqueeze. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://github.com/
NetManAIOps/PSqueeze
[94] NetManAIOps.2021.GitHub-NetManAIOps/TraceRCA:PracticalRootCauseLocalizationforMicroserviceSystems
via Trace Analysis. IWQoS 2021. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://github.com/NetManAIOps/TraceRCA
[95] HiepNguyen,ZhimingShen,YongminTan,andXiaohuiGu.2013.Fchain:Towardblack-boxonlinefaultlocalization
for cloud systems. In2013 IEEE 33rd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems. IEEE, 21–30.
[96] Hiep Nguyen, Yongmin Tan, and Xiaohui Gu. 2011. Pal: P ropagation-aware a nomaly l ocalization for cloud hosted
distributed applications. InManaging Large-Scale Systems via the Analysis of System Logs and the Application of
Machine Learning Techniques.1 – 8 .
[97] Paolo Notaro, Jorge Cardoso, and Michael Gerndt. 2021. A survey of aiops methods for failure management.ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST)12, 6 (2021), 1–45.
[98] OpenTelemetry Authors. 2025. What is OpenTelemetry? OpenTelemetry. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://
opentelemetry.io/docs/what-is-opentelemetry/
[99] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini
Agarwal,KatarinaSlama,AlexRay,JohnSchulman,JacobHilton,FraserKelton,LukeMiller,MaddieSimens,Amanda
Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul F. Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems35 (2022), 27730–27744.
[100] Yicheng Pan, Meng Ma, Xinrui Jiang, and Ping Wang. 2021. Faster, deeper, easier: Crowdsourcing diagnosis of mi-
croservice kernel failure from user space. InProceedings of the 30th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Soft-
ware Testing and Analysis. 646–657.
[101] Hanchuan Peng, Fuhui Long, and Chris Ding. 2005. Feature selection based on mutual information criteria of max-
dependency,max-relevance,andmin-redundancy. IEEETransactionsonPatternAnalysisandMachineIntelligence 27,
8 (2005), 1226–1238.
[102] CuongPham,LongWang,ByungChulTak,SalmanBaset,ChunqiangTang,ZbigniewKalbarczyk,andRavishankarK
Iyer. 2016. Failure diagnosis for distributed systems using targeted fault injection.IEEE Transactions on Parallel and
Distributed Systems28, 2 (2016), 503–516.
[103] Soma Prathiba, S. Sowvarnica, B. Latha, and G. Sumathi. 2018. A comparative study of task and fault tolerance clus-
tering techniques for scientific workflow applications in cloud platform. InData Science Analytics and Applications:
FirstInternationalConference,DaSAA2017,Chennai,India,January4–6,2017,RevisedSelectedPapers1 .Springer ,1–7.
[104] FluentdProject.2025.WhatisFluentd?|Fluentd.www.fluentd.org.RetrievedJune4,2025from https://www.fluentd.
org/architecture
[105] ThePrometheusAuthors.2021.prometheus/node_exporter.GitHub.RetrievedJune4,2025from https://github.com/
prometheus/node_exporte
[106] The Prometheus Authors. 2025. Prometheus - Monitoring system & time series database. prometheus.io. Retrieved
June 4, 2025 fromhttps://prometheus.io
[107] Pyroscope. 2022. Open Source Continuous Profiling Platform. Pyroscope.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://
pyroscope.io/
[108] JuanQiu,QingfengDu,KanglinYin,Shuang-LiZhang,andChongshuQian.2020.Acausalityminingandknowledge
graph based method of root cause diagnosis for performance anomaly in cloud applications.Applied Sciences10, 6
(2020), 2166.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
325:36 N. Fu et al.
[109] GangRen,EricTune,TippMoseley,YixinShi,SilviusRus,andRobertHundt.2010.Google-wideprofiling:Acontin-
uous profiling infrastructure for data centers.IEEE Micro30, 4 (2010), 65–79.
[110] Rui Ren, Yang Wang, Fengrui Liu, Zhenyu Li, Gareth Tyson, Tianhao Miao, and Gaogang Xie. 2023. Grace: Inter-
pretable root cause analysis by graph convolutional network for microservices. In2023 IEEE/ACM31st International
Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS’23). IEEE, 1–4.
[111] Areeg Samir and Claus Pahl. 2019. Dla: Detecting and localizing anomalies in containerized microservice architec-
tures using markov models. In2019 7th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud’19).
IEEE, 205–213.
[112] Samuel.2020.The3PillarsofSystemObservability:Logs,Metrics,andTracing.Retrievedfrom https://iamondemand.
com/blog/the-3-pillars-of-system-observability-logs-metrics-and-tracing/ . Accessed Apr. 4, 2025.
[113] Huasong Shan, Yuan Chen, Haifeng Liu, Yunpeng Zhang, Xiao Xiao, Xiaofeng He, Min Li, and Wei Ding. 2019.
?-diagnosis: Unsupervised and real-time diagnosis of small-window long-tail latency in large-scale microservice
platforms. InThe World Wide Web Conference. 3215–3222.
[114] Junxian Shen, Han Zhang, Yang Xiang, Xingang Shi, Xinrui Li, Yunxi Shen, Zijian Zhang, Yongxiang Wu, Xia Yin,
JilongWang,MingweiXu,YahuiLi,JipingYin,JianchangSong,ZhuofengLi,andRunjieNie.2023.Network-centric
distributed tracing with DeepFlow: Troubleshooting your microservices in zero code. InProceedings of the ACM
SIGCOMM 2023 Conference. 420–437.
[115] BenjaminH.Sigelman,LuizAndréBarroso,MikeBurrows,PatStephenson,ManojPlakal,DonaldBeaver,SaulJaspan,
and Chandan Shanbhag. 2010. Dapper, a large-scale distributed systems tracing infrastructure. (2010).
[116] SolarWinds Worldwide, LLC. 2025. What is Observability?—IT Glossary | SolarWinds. www.solarwinds.com. Re-
trieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://www.solarwinds.com/resources/it-glossary/observability
[117] SolarWinds Worldwide, LLC. 2025. Log Monitoring | Loggly. Log Analysis | Log Monitoring by Loggly. Retrieved
June 4, 2025 fromhttps://www.loggly.com/product/log-monitoring/
[118] JacopoSoldaniandAntonioBrogi.2022.Anomalydetectionandfailurerootcauseanalysisin(micro)service-based
cloud applications: A survey.ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)55, 3 (2022), 1–39.
[119] JacopoSoldani,DamianAndrewTamburri,andWillem-JanVanDenHeuvel.2018.Thepainsandgainsofmicroser-
vices: A systematic grey literature review.Journal of Systems and Software146 (2018), 215–232.
[120] MarcSolé,VictorMuntés-Mulero,AnnieIbrahimRana,andGiovaniEstrada.2017.Surveyonmodelsandtechniques
for root-cause analysis. arXiv:1701.08546. Retrieved fromhttps://arxiv.org/abs/1701.08546
[121] Peter Spirtes, Clark N. Glymour, and Richard Scheines. 2000.Causation, Prediction, and Search. MIT Press.
[122] Splunk LLC. 2025.Splunk Products. Splunk. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://www.splunk.com/en_us/products.
html
[123] The strace developers. 2024.strace/strace. GitHub. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps://github.com/strace/strace
[124] Netflix.2022.Cassandra.NetflixTechBlog.RetrievedJune4,2025from https://netflixtechblog.com/tagged/cassandra
[125] JörgThalheim,AntonioRodrigues,IstemiEkinAkkus,PramodBhatotia,RuichuanChen,BimalViswanath,LeiJiao,
and Christof Fetzer. 2017. Sieve: Actionable insights from monitored metrics in distributed systems. InProceedings
of the 18th ACM/IFIP/USENIX Middleware Conference. 14–27.
[126] A. Thurai and S. D. Linthicum. 2021. GigaOm radar for cloud observability.GigaOm, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, Tech.
Rep (2021), 37.
[127] MuhammadUsman,SimoneFerlin,AnnaBrunstrom,andJavidTaheri.2022.Asurveyonobservabilityofdistributed
edge & container-based microservices.IEEE Access10 (2022), 86904–86919.
[128] Hanzhang Wang, Zhengkai Wu, Huai Jiang, Yichao Huang, Jiamu Wang, Selcuk Kopru, and Tao Xie. 2021. Groot:
An event-graph-based approach for root cause analysis in industrial settings. In2021 36th IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE’21). IEEE, 419–429.
[129] KuiWang,CarolFung,ChaoDing,PoloPei,ShaohanHuang,ZhongzhiLuan,andDepeiQian.2015.Amethodology
forroot-causeanalysisincomponentbasedsystems.In 2015IEEE23rdInternationalSymposiumonQualityofService
(IWQoS’15). IEEE, 243–248.
[130] Lu Wang, Chaoyun Zhang, Ruomeng Ding, Yong Xu, Qihang Chen, Wentao Zou, Qingjun Chen, Meng Zhang, Xue-
dong Gao, Hao Fan, Saravan Rajmohan, Qingwei Lin, and Dongmei Zhang. 2023. Root cause analysis for microser-
vice systems via hierarchical reinforcementlearningfrom human feedback.InProceedings of the29th ACMSIGKDD
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. 5116–5125.
[131] Lingzhi Wang, Nengwen Zhao, Junjie Chen, Pinnong Li, Wenchi Zhang, and Kaixin Sui. 2020. Root-cause metric
location for microservice systems via log anomaly detection. In2020 IEEE International Conference on Web Services
(ICWS’20). IEEE, 142–150.
[132] PingWang,JingminXu,MengMa,WeilanLin,DishengPan,YuanWang,andPengfeiChen.2018.Cloudranger:Root
cause identification for cloud native systems. In2018 18th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and
Grid Computing (CCGRID’18). IEEE, 492–502.
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.
Intelligent Root Cause Localization in MicroService Systems 325:37
[133] Jianping Weng, Jessie Hui Wang, Jiahai Yang, and Yang Yang. 2018. Root cause analysis of anomalies of multitier
services in public clouds.IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking26, 4 (2018), 1646–1659.
[134] LiWu,JasminBogatinovski,SashoNedelkoski,JohanTordsson,andOdejKao.2020.Performancediagnosisincloud
microservices using deep learning. InInternational Conference on Service-Oriented Computing. Springer, 85–96.
[135] Li Wu, Johan Tordsson, Jasmin Bogatinovski, Erik Elmroth, and Odej Kao. 2021. Microdiag: Fine-grained perfor-
mance diagnosis for microservice systems. In2021 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on Cloud Intelligence (CloudIn-
telligence’21). IEEE, 31–36.
[136] Li Wu, Johan Tordsson, Erik Elmroth, and Odej Kao. 2020. Microrca: Root cause localization of performance issues
in microservices. InNOMS 2020-2020 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium. IEEE, 1–9.
[137] Linwei Yang, Jing Li, Kuanzhi Shi, Songlin Yang, Qingfu Yang, and Jiangang Sun. 2022. MicroMILTS: Fault location
for microservices based mutual information and LSTM autoencoder. In2022 23rd Asia-Pacific Network Operations
and Management Symposium (APNOMS’22). IEEE, 1–6.
[138] Zihao Ye, Pengfei Chen, and Guangba Yu. 2021. T-rank: A lightweight spectrum based fault localization approach
for microservice systems. In2021 IEEE/ACM 21st International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing
(CCGrid’21). IEEE, 416–425.
[139] Guangba Yu, Pengfei Chen, Hongyang Chen, Zijie Guan, Zicheng Huang, Linxiao Jing, Tianjun Weng, Xinmeng
Sun, and Xiaoyun Li. 2021. Microrank: End-to-end latency issue localization with extended spectrum analysis in
microservice environments. InProceedings of the Web Conference 2021. 3087–3098.
[140] ZabbixLLC.2018.Zabbix-TheEnterprise-ClassOpenSourceNetworkMonitoringSolution.Zabbix.com.Retrieved
June 4, 2025 fromhttps://www.zabbix.com
[141] HeZhang,ShanshanLi,ZijiaJia,ChenxingZhong,andChengZhang.2019.Microservicearchitectureinreality:An
industrial inquiry. In2019 IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA’19). IEEE, 51–60.
[142] Qixun Zhang, Tong Jia, Zhonghai Wu, Qingxin Wu, Lichun Jia, Donglei Li, Yuqing Tao, and Yutong Xiao. 2022.
Fault localization for microservice applications with system logs and monitoring metrics. In2022 7th International
Conference on Cloud Computing and Big Data Analytics (ICCCBDA’22). IEEE, 149–154.
[143] Yingying Zhang, Zhengxiong Guan, Huajie Qian, Leili Xu, Hengbo Liu, Qingsong Wen, Liang Sun, Junwei Jiang,
Lunting Fan, and Min Ke. 2021. CloudRCA: A root cause analysis framework for cloud computing platforms. In
Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management. 4373–4382.
[144] ZekunZhang,BingLi,JianWang,andYongqiangLiu.2021.AAMR:Automatedanomalousmicroservice rankingin
cloud-native environment. InSEKE. 86–91.
[145] Xiang Zhou, Xin Peng, Tao Xie, Jun Sun, Chao Ji, Wenhai Li, and Dan Ding. 2018. Fault analysis and debugging
of microservice systems: Industrial survey, benchmark system, and empirical study.IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering 47, 2 (2018), 243–260.
[146] XiangZhou,XinPeng,TaoXie,JunSun,ChaoJi,DeweiLiu,QilinXiang,andChuanHe.2019.Latenterrorprediction
and fault localization for microservice applications by learning from system trace logs. InProceedings of the 2019
27thACMJointMeetingonEuropeanSoftwareEngineeringConferenceandSymposiumontheFoundationsofSoftware
Engineering. 683–694.
[147] The Zipkin Authors. 2025. OpenZipkin · A distributed tracing system. Zipkin.io. Retrieved June 4, 2025 fromhttps:
//zipkin.io
Received 29 April 2024; revised 10 April 2025; accepted 29 April 2025
ACM Comput. Surv., Vol. 57, No. 12, Article 325. Publication date: July 2025.